Title: A Complex Interplay of DJ-1, LRRK2, and Nrf2 in the Regulation of Mitochondrial Function in Cypermethrin-Induced Parkinsonism.
PMID: 37674036

Abstract:
Cypermethrin impairs mitochondrial function, induces redox imbalance, and leads to Parkinsonism in experimental animals. Knockdown of deglycase-1 (DJ-1) gene, which encodes a redox-sensitive antioxidant protein, aggravates cypermethrin-mediated α-synuclein overexpression and oxidative alteration of proteins. DJ-1 is also reported to be essential for maintaining stability of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), shielding cells against oxidative insult. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), another protein associated with Parkinson's disease, is also involved in regulating mitochondrial function. However, underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. The study intended to explore an interaction of DJ-1, LRRK2, and Nrf2 in the regulation of mitochondrial function in cypermethrin-induced Parkinsonism. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of DJ-1 and LRRK2 gene and pharmacological activation of Nrf2 were performed in rats and/or human neuroblastoma cells with or without cypermethrin. Indexes of oxidative stress, mitochondrial impairment, and Parkinsonism along with α-synuclein expression, post-translational modification, and aggregation were measured. DJ-1 gene knockdown exacerbated cypermethrin-induced increase in oxidative stress and intrinsic apoptosis and reduction in expression of mitochondrial antioxidant proteins via inhibiting nuclear translocation of Nrf2. Additionally, cypermethrin-induced oxidative stress, mitochondrial impairment, and α-synuclein expression and aggregation were found to be suppressed by LRRK2 gene knockdown, by promoting Nrf2 nuclear translocation and expression of mitochondrial antioxidant proteins. Furthermore, Nrf2 activator, sulforaphane, ameliorated cypermethrin-induced mitochondrial impairment and oxidative stress and provided protection against dopaminergic neuronal death. The findings indicate that DJ-1 and LRRK2 independently alter Nrf2-mediated changes and a complex interplay among DJ-1, LRRK2, and Nrf2 exists in the regulation of mitochondrial function in cypermethrin-induced Parkinsonism.