Title: A Novel Artificial-Intelligence-Based Approach for Classification of Parkinson's Disease Using Complex and Large Vocal Features.
PMID: 37622956

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) affects a large proportion of elderly people. Symptoms include tremors, slow movement, rigid muscles, and trouble speaking. With the aging of the developed world's population, this number is expected to rise. The early detection of PD and avoiding its severe consequences require a precise and efficient system. Our goal is to create an accurate AI model that can identify PD using human voices. We developed a transformer-based method for detecting PD by retrieving dysphonia measures from a subject's voice recording. It is uncommon to use a neural network (NN)-based solution for tabular vocal characteristics, but it has several advantages over a tree-based approach, including compatibility with continuous learning and the network's potential to be linked with an image/voice encoder for a more accurate multi modal solution, shifting SOTA approach from tree-based to a neural network (NN) is crucial for advancing research in multimodal solutions. Our method outperforms the state of the art (SOTA), namely Gradient-Boosted Decision Trees (GBDTs), by at least 1% AUC, and the precision and recall scores are also improved. We additionally offered an XgBoost-based feature-selection method and a fully connected NN layer technique for including continuous dysphonia measures, in addition to the solution network. We also discussed numerous important discoveries relating to our suggested solution and deep learning (DL) and its application to dysphonia measures, such as how a transformer-based network is more resilient to increased depth compared to a simple MLP network. The performance of the proposed approach and conventional machine learning techniques such as MLP, SVM, and Random Forest (RF) have also been compared. A detailed performance comparison matrix has been added to this article, along with the proposed solution's space and time complexity.