Title: A sporadic Parkinson's disease model via silencing of the ubiquitin-proteasome/E3 ligase component, SKP1A.
PMID: 37644186

Abstract:
Our and other's laboratory microarray-derived transcriptomic studies in human PD substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) samples have opened an avenue to concentrate on potential gene intersections or cross-talks along the dopaminergic (DAergic) neurodegenerative cascade in sporadic PD (SPD). One emerging gene candidate identified was SKP1A (p19, S-phase kinase-associated protein 1A), found significantly decreased in the SNpc as confirmed later at the protein level. SKP1 is part of the Skp1, Cullin 1, F-box protein (SCF) complex, the largest known class of sophisticated ubiquitin-proteasome/E3-ligases and was found to directly interact with FBXO7, a gene defective in PARK15-linked PD. This finding has led us to the hypothesis that a targeted site-specific reduction of Skp1 levels in DAergic neuronal cell culture and animal systems may result in a progressive loss of DAergic neurons and hopefully recreate motor disabilities in animals. The second premise considers the possibility that both intrinsic and extrinsic factors (e.g., manipulation of selected genes and mitochondria impairing toxins), alleged to play central roles in DAergic neurodegeneration in PD, may act in concert as modifiers of Skp1 deficiency-induced phenotype alterations ('dual-hit' hypothesis of neurodegeneration). To examine a possible role of Skp1 in DAergic phenotype, we have initially knocked down the expression of SKP1A gene in an embryonic mouse SN-derived cell line (SN4741) with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) lentiviruses (LVs). The deficiency of SKP1A closely recapitulated cardinal features of the DAergic pathology of human PD, such as decreased expression of DAergic phenotypic markers and cell cycle aberrations. Furthermore, the knocked down cells displayed a lethal phenotype when induced to differentiate exhibiting proteinaceous round inclusion structures, which were almost identical in composition to human Lewy bodies, a hallmark of PD. These findings support a role for Skp1 in neuronal phenotype, survival, and differentiation. The identification of Skp1 as a key player in DAergic neuron function suggested that a targeted site-specific reduction of Skp1 levels in mice SNpc may result in a progressive loss of DAergic neurons and terminal projections in the striatum. The injected LV SKP1shRNA to mouse SN resulted in decreased expression of Skp1 protein levels within DAergic neurons and loss of tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity (TH-IR) in both SNpc and striatum that was accompanied by time-dependent motor disabilities. The reduction of the vertical movements, that is rearing, may be reminiscent of the early occurrence of hypokinesia and axial, postural instability in PD. According to the 'dual-hit' hypothesis of neurodegenerative diseases, it is predicted that gene-gene and/or gene-environmental factors would act in concert or sequentially to propagate the pathological process of PD. Our findings are compatible with this conjecture showing that the genetic vulnerability caused by knock down of SKP1A renders DAergic SN4741 cells especially sensitive to genetic reduction of Aldh1 and exposure to the external stressors MPP<sup>+</sup> and DA, which have been implicated in PD pathology. Future consideration should be given in manipulation SKP1A expression as therapeutic window, via its induction genetically or pharmacological, to prevent degeneration of the nigra striatal dopamine neurons, since UPS is defective.