Title: Ameliorative potential of stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHED) in preclinical studies: A meta-analysis.
PMID: 37441223

Abstract:
The preclinical and clinical role of mesenchymal stem cells from various adult sources is extensively investigated and established in regenerative medicine. However, the comprehensive exploration of the therapeutic potential of Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHED) is inadequate. Therefore, we performed a systematic meta-analysis of preclinical animal model studies in several diseases to provide insight into SHED's efficacy and therapeutic potential. Two blinded and independent investigators searched the available online databases and scrutinized the included studies. Meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the pooled effect estimate of intervention of SHED by Review Manager 5.4.1. To investigate the therapeutic efficacy of SHED intervention, we also analyzed the test of heterogeneity (I2), overall effect (Z), sensitivity, and publication bias. Among the 2156 scrutinized studies, 40 were included and evaluated as per inclusion and exclusion criteria. The intervention of SHED and its derivatives in several diseases depicted statistically significant therapeutic effects in periodontitis, pulpitis, spinal cord injury, parkinson's disease, alzheimer's disease, focal cerebral ischemia, peripheral nerve injury, and retinal pigmentosa. SHED also improved levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and bilirubin in liver fibrosis . In autoimmune diseases also, values were significant. SHED also showed a statistically significant reduction of wound healing area and new bone formation in bone defects. The pooled effect estimates of included preclinical studies demonstrated a statistically significant therapeutic effect of SHED in numerous diseases. Based on our data, it is suggested that the potential of SHED may be implemented in clinical trials after conducting a few more preclinical studies.