Title: An adverse outcome pathway for chemical-induced Parkinson's disease: Calcium is key.
PMID: 37926220

Abstract:
Exposure to pesticides is associated with an increased risk of developing Parkinson's disease (PD). Currently, rodent-based risk assessment studies cannot adequately capture neurodegenerative effects of pesticides due to a lack of human-relevant endpoints targeted at neurodegeneration. Thus, there is a need for improvement of the risk assessment guidelines. Specifically, a mechanistic assessment strategy, based on human physiology and (patho)biology is needed, which can be applied in next generation risk assessment. The Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP) framework is particularly well-suited to provide the mechanistic basis for such a strategy. Here, we conducted a semi-systematic review in Embase and MEDLINE, focused on neurodegeneration and pesticides, to develop an AOP network for parkinsonian motor symptoms. Articles were labelled and included/excluded using the online platform Sysrev. Only primary articles, written in English, focused on effects of pesticides or PD model compounds in models for the brain were included. A total of 66 articles, out of the 1700 screened, was included. PD symptoms are caused by loss of function and ultimately death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN). Our literature review highlights that a unique feature of these cells that increases their vulnerability is their reliance on continuous low-level influx of calcium. As such, excess intracellular calcium was identified as a central early Key Event (KE). This KE can lead to death of dopaminergic neurons of the SN, and eventually parkinsonian motor symptoms, via four distinct pathways: 1) activation of calpains, 2) endoplasmic reticulum stress, 3) impairment of protein degradation, and 4) oxidative damage. Several receptors have been identified that may serve as molecular initiating events (MIEs) to trigger one or more of these pathways. The proposed AOP network provides the biological basis that can be used to develop a mechanistic testing strategy that captures neurodegenerative effects of pesticides.