Title: Analysis of clinical failure of anti-tau and anti-synuclein antibodies in neurodegeneration using a quantitative systems pharmacology model.
PMID: 37658103

Abstract:
Misfolded proteins in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease follow a well-defined connectomics-based spatial progression. Several anti-tau and anti-alpha synuclein (aSyn) antibodies have failed to provide clinical benefit in clinical trials despite substantial target engagement in the experimentally accessible cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The proposed mechanism of action is reducing neuronal uptake of oligomeric protein from the synaptic cleft. We built a quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP) model to quantitatively simulate intrasynaptic secretion, diffusion and antibody capture in the synaptic cleft, postsynaptic membrane binding and internalization of monomeric and oligomeric tau and aSyn proteins. Integration with a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model allowed us to simulate clinical trials of anti-tau antibodies gosuranemab, tilavonemab, semorinemab, and anti-aSyn antibodies cinpanemab and prasineuzumab. Maximal target engagement for monomeric tau was simulated as 45% (semorinemab) to 99% (gosuranemab) in CSF, 30% to 99% in ISF but only 1% to 3% in the synaptic cleft, leading to a reduction of less than 1% in uptake of oligomeric tau. Simulations for prasineuzumab and cinpanemab suggest target engagement of free monomeric aSyn of only 6-8% in CSF, 4-6% and 1-2% in the ISF and synaptic cleft, while maximal target engagement of aggregated aSyn was predicted to reach 99% and 80% in the synaptic cleft with similar effects on neuronal uptake. The study generates optimal values of selectivity, sensitivity and PK profiles for antibodies. The study identifies a gradient of decreasing target engagement from CSF to the synaptic cleft as a key driver of efficacy, quantitatively identifies various improvements for drug design and emphasizes the need for QSP modelling to support the development of tau and aSyn antibodies.