Title: Analysis of abnormal posture in patients with Parkinson's disease using a computational model considering muscle tones.
PMID: 37867918

Abstract:
Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) exhibit distinct abnormal postures, including neck-down, stooped postures, and Pisa syndrome, collectively termed "abnormal posture" henceforth. In the previous study, when assuming an upright stance, patients with PD exhibit heightened instability in contrast to healthy individuals with disturbance, implying that abnormal postures serve as compensatory mechanisms to mitigate sway during static standing. However, limited studies have explored the relationship between abnormal posture and sway in the context of static standing. Increased muscle tone (i.e., constant muscle activity against the gravity) has been proposed as an underlying reason for abnormal postures. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the following hypothesis: abnormal posture with increased muscle tone leads to a smaller sway compared with that in other postures, including normal upright standing, under the sway minimization criterion. To investigate the hypothesis, we assessed the sway in multiple postures, which is determined by joint angles, including cases with bended hip joints. Our approach involved conducting forward dynamics simulations using a computational model comprising a musculoskeletal model and a neural controller model. The neural controller model proposed integrates two types of control mechanisms: feedforward control (representing muscle tone as a vector) and feedback control using proprioceptive and vestibular sensory information. An optimization was performed to determine the posture of the musculoskeletal model and the accompanied parameters of the neural controller model for each of the given muscle tone vector to minimize sway. The optimized postures to minimize sway for the optimal muscle tone vector of patients with PD were compared to the actual postures observed in these patients. The results revealed that on average, the joint-angle differences between these postures was <4°, which was less than one-tenth of the typical joint range of motion. These results suggest that patients with PD exhibit less sway in the abnormal posture than in other postures. Thus, adopting an abnormal posture with increased muscle tone can potentially serve as a valid strategy for minimizing sway in patients with PD.