Title: Antagonizing pathological α-synuclein-mediated neurodegeneration by J24335 via the activation of immunoproteasome.
PMID: 37931757

Abstract:
The aggregation of misfolded proteins, such as α-synuclein in Parkinson's disease (PD), occurs intracellularly or extracellularly in the majority of neurodegenerative diseases. The immunoproteasome has more potent chymotrypsin-like activity than normal proteasome. Thus, degradation of α-synuclein aggregation via immunoproteasome is an attractive approach for PD drug development. Herein, we aimed to determine if novel compound, 11-Hydroxy-1-(8-methoxy-5-(trifluoromethyl)quinolin-2-yl)undecan-1-one oxime (named as J24335), is a promising candidate for disease-modifying therapy to prevent the pathological progression of neurodegenerative diseases, such as PD. The effects of J24335 on inducible PC12/A53T-α-syn cell viability and cytotoxicity were evaluated by MTT assay and LDH assay, respectively. Evaluation of various proteasome activities was done by measuring the luminescence of enzymatic activity after the addition of different amounts of aminoluciferin. Immunoblotting and real-time PCR were employed to detect the expression of various proteins and genes, respectively. We also used a transgenic mouse model for behavioral testing and immunochemical analysis, to assess the neuroprotective effects of J24335. J24335 inhibited wild-type and mutant α-synuclein aggregation without affecting the growth or death of neuronal cells. The inhibition of α-synuclein aggregation by J24335 was caused by activation of immunoproteasome, as mediated by upregulation of LMP7, and increased cellular chymotrypsin-like activity in 20S proteasome. J24335-enhanced immunoproteasome activity was mediated by PKA/Akt/mTOR pathway activation. Moreover, animal studies revealed that J24335 treatment markedly mitigated both the loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH-) neurons and impaired motor skill development. This is the first report to use J24335 as an immunoproteasome enhancing agent to antagonize pathological α-synuclein-mediated neurodegeneration.