Title: Auto-Classification of Parkinson's Disease with Different Motor Subtypes Using Arterial Spin Labelling MRI Based on Machine Learning.
PMID: 38002484

Abstract:
The purpose of this study was to automatically classify different motor subtypes of Parkinson's disease (PD) on arterial spin labelling magnetic resonance imaging (ASL-MRI) data using support vector machine (SVM). This study included 38 subjects: 21 PD patients and 17 normal controls (NCs). Based on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) subscores, patients were divided into the tremor-dominant (TD) subtype and the postural instability gait difficulty (PIGD) subtype. The subjects were in a resting state during the acquisition of ASL-MRI data. The automated anatomical atlas 3 (AAL3) template was registered to obtain an ASL image of the same size and shape. We obtained the voxel values of 170 brain regions by considering the location coordinates of these regions and then normalized the data. The length of the feature vector depended on the number of voxel values in each brain region. Three binary classification models were utilized for classifying subjects' data, and we applied SVM to classify voxels in the brain regions. The left subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC_sub_L) was clearly distinguished in both NCs and PD patients using SVM, and we obtained satisfactory diagnostic rates (accuracy = 92.31%, specificity = 96.97%, sensitivity = 84.21%, and AUCmax = 0.9585). For the right supramarginal gyrus (SupraMarginal_R), SVM distinguished the TD group from the other groups with satisfactory diagnostic rates (accuracy = 84.21%, sensitivity = 63.64%, specificity = 92.59%, and AUCmax = 0.9192). For the right intralaminar of thalamus (Thal_IL_R), SVM distinguished the PIGD group from the other groups with satisfactory diagnostic rates (accuracy = 89.47%, sensitivity = 70.00%, specificity = 6.43%, and AUCmax = 0.9464). These results are consistent with the changes in blood perfusion related to PD subtypes. In addition, the sensitive brain regions of the TD group and PIGD group involve the brain regions where the cerebellothalamocortical (CTC) and the striatal thalamocortical (STC) loops are located. Therefore, it is suggested that the blood perfusion patterns of the two loops may be different. These characteristic brain regions could become potential imaging markers of cerebral blood flow to distinguish TD from PIGD. Meanwhile, our findings provide an imaging basis for personalised treatment, thereby optimising clinical diagnostic and treatment approaches.