Title: Brain transcriptomic, metabolic and mitohormesis properties associated with N-propargylglycine treatment: A prevention strategy against neurodegeneration.
PMID: 38128812

Abstract:
There is an urgent need for new or repurposed therapeutics that protect against or significantly delay the clinical progression of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Huntington's disease (HD), Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. In particular, preclinical studies are needed for well tolerated and brain-penetrating small molecules capable of mitigating the proteotoxic mitochondrial processes that are hallmarks of these diseases. We identified a unique suicide inhibitor of mitochondrial proline dehydrogenase (Prodh), N-propargylglycine (N-PPG), which has anticancer and brain-enhancing mitohormesis properties, and we hypothesize that induction of mitohormesis by N-PPG protects against neurodegenerative diseases. We carried out a series of mouse studies designed to: i) compare brain and metabolic responses while on oral N-PPG treatment (50 mg/kg, 9-14 days) of B6CBA wildtype (WT) and short-lived transgenic R6/2 (HD) mice; and ii) evaluate potential brain and systemwide stress rebound responses in WT mice 2 months after cessation of extended mitohormesis induction by well-tolerated higher doses of N-PPG (100-200 mg/kg x 60 days). WT and HD mice showed comparable global evidence of N-PPG induced brain mitohormesis characterized by Prodh protein decay and increased mitochondrial expression of chaperone and Yme1l1 protease proteins. Interestingly, transcriptional analysis (RNAseq) showed partial normalization of HD whole brain transcriptomes toward those of WT mice. Comprehensive metabolomic profiles performed on control and N-PPG treated blood, brain, and kidney samples revealed expected N-PPG-induced tissue increases in proline levels in both WT and HD mice, accompanied by surprising parallel increases in hydroxyproline and sarcosine. Two months after cessation of the higher dose N-PPG stress treatments, WT mouse brains showed robust rebound increases in Prodh protein levels and mitochondrial transcriptome responses, as well as altered profiles of blood amino acid-related metabolites. Our HD and WT mouse preclinical findings point to the brain penetrating and mitohormesis-inducing potential of the drug candidate, N-PPG, and provide new rationale and application insights supporting its further preclinical testing in various models of neurodegenerative diseases characterized by loss of mitochondrial proteostasis.