Title: Can Ashwagandha Benefit the Endocrine System?-A Review.
PMID: 38003702

Abstract:
<i>Withania somnifera</i>, also known as Ashwagandha, has been used in traditional medicine for thousands of years. Due to the wide range of its activities, there has been interest in its possible beneficial effects on the human body. It is proved that, among others, Ashwagandha has anti-stress, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, anti-cancer, anti-diabetic, anti-obesity, cardioprotective, and hypolipidemic properties. Particularly interesting are its properties reported in the field of psychiatry and neurology: in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, depression, bipolar disorder, insomnia, anxiety disorders and many others. The aim of this review is to find and summarize the effect that Ashwagandha root extract has on the endocrine system and hormones. The multitude of active substances and the wide hormonal problems faced by modern society sparked our interest in the topic of Ashwagandha's impact on this system. In this work, we also attempted to draw conclusions as to whether <i>W. somnifera</i> can help normalize the functions of the human endocrine system in the future. The search mainly included research published in the years 2010-2023. The results of the research show that Ashwagandha can have a positive effect on the functioning of the endocrine system, including improving the secretory function of the thyroid gland, normalizing adrenal activity, and multidirectional improvement on functioning of the reproductive system. The main mechanism of action in the latter appears to be based on the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, as a decrease in cortisol levels and an increase in hormones such as luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in men were found, which results in stress level reduction and improvement in fertility. In turn, other studies prove that active substances from <i>W. somnifera</i>, acting on the body, cause an increase in the secretion of triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) by the thyroid gland and a subsequent decrease in the level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in accordance with the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis. In light of these findings, it is clear that Ashwagandha holds significant promise as a natural remedy for various health concerns, especially those related to the endocrine system. Future research may provide new insights into its mechanisms of action and expand its applications in both traditional and modern medicine. The safety and toxicity of Ashwagandha also remain important issues, which may affect its potential use in specific patient groups.