Title: Causal relationship between psoriasis vulgaris and dementia: Insights from Mendelian randomization analysis.
PMID: 37997526

Abstract:
Many clinical studies have demonstrated a correlation between psoriasis vulgaris and dementia, yet this correlation remains controversial. Our study employed the Mendelian randomization (MR) method to investigate the causal relationship between psoriasis vulgaris and dementia. Data were obtained from the summary statistics of the genome-wide association studies from IEU-OpenGWAS project database. In univariate Mendelian randomization (UVMR) analysis, psoriasis vulgaris was used as exposure. Alzheimer disease (AD), vascular dementia (VaD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) served as the outcomes. In multivariate Mendelian randomization (MVMR) analysis, VaD served as the outcome. The first MVMR analysis used psoriasis vulgaris, mean platelet volume (MPV), platelet distribution width (PDW) and platelet count (PLT) as exposures. The second MVMR analysis used psoriasis vulgaris, vitamin D level and 25 hydroxyvitamin D level as exposures. The main analysis employed the inverse variance weighted method, and the outcomes were evaluated by odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI). In UVMR analysis, the results depicted that psoriasis vulgaris was associated with VaD (OR: 0.903, 95% CI: 0.818-0.996, p = 0.041). The results revealed insignificant associations between psoriasis vulgaris and other dementia types. After adjusting the effects of MPV, PDW and PLT in MVMR analysis, the association between psoriasis vulgaris and VaD was no longer significant (p = 0.164). Similarly, after adjusting the effects of vitamin D level and 25 hydroxyvitamin D level in MVMR analysis, the association between psoriasis vulgaris and VaD was also no longer significant (p = 0.533). Our study suggests that psoriasis vulgaris may potentially decrease VaD incidence. However, the causal association between psoriasis vulgaris and VaD may be impeded by platelet-related indices, vitamin D level and 25 hydroxyvitamin D level.