Title: Chiisanoside Mediates the Parkin/ZNF746/PGC-1α Axis by Downregulating MiR-181a to Improve Mitochondrial Biogenesis in 6-OHDA-Caused Neurotoxicity Models In Vitro and In Vivo: Suggestions for Prevention of Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 37760085

Abstract:
The degeneration of dopamine (DA) neurons is known to be associated with defects in mitochondrial biogenesis caused by aging, environmental factors, or mutations in genes, leading to Parkinson's disease (PD). As PD has not yet been successfully cured, the strategy of using small molecule drugs to protect and restore mitochondrial biogenesis is a promising direction. This study evaluated the efficacy of synthetic chiisanoside (CSS) identified in the leaves of <i>Acanthopanax sessiliflorus</i> to prevent PD symptoms. The results show that in the 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) model, CSS pretreatment can effectively alleviate the <i>reactive oxygen species</i> generation and apoptosis of SH-SY5Y cells, thereby lessening the defects in the <i>C. elegans</i> model including DA neuron degeneration, dopamine-mediated food sensitivity behavioral disorders, and shortened lifespan. Mechanistically, we found that CSS could restore the expression of proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1-alpha (PGC-1α), a key molecule in mitochondrial biogenesis, and its downstream related genes inhibited by 6-OHDA. We further confirmed that this is due to the enhanced activity of parkin leading to the ubiquitination and degradation of PGC-1α inhibitor protein Zinc finger protein 746 (ZNF746). Parkin siRNA treatment abolished this effect of CSS. Furthermore, we found that CSS inhibited 6-OHDA-induced expression of miR-181a, which targets parkin. The CSS's ability to reverse the 6-OHDA-induced reduction in mitochondrial biogenesis and activation of apoptosis was abolished after the transfection of anti-miR-181a and miR-181a mimics. Therefore, the neuroprotective effect of CSS mainly promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by regulating the miR-181a/Parkin/ZNF746/PGC-1α axis. CSS potentially has the opportunity to be developed into PD prevention agents.