Title: Chitosan stabilized copper iodide nanoparticles enabled nano-bio-engineered platform for efficient electrochemical biosensing of dopamine.
PMID: 37866579

Abstract:
Neurodegenerative disorders are one of the significant challenges to the aging society, as per the United Nations, where 1 in 6 people globally over 65 years of age are expected to suffer by 2050. The exact pathophysiological root of these disorders is although not known adequately, but reduced dopamine (most significant neurotransmitters) levels have been reported in people affected by Parkinson's disease. Sensitive detection and effective monitoring of dopamine can help to diagnose these neurodegenerative disorders at a very early stage, which will help to properly treat these disorders and slow down their progression. Therefore, it is crucial to detect physiological and clinically acceptable amounts of dopamine with high sensitivity and selectivity in basic pathophysiology research, medication, and illness diagnosis. Here in this present investigation, nano-bio-engineered stable chitosan stabilized copper iodide nanoparticles (CS@CuI NPs) were synthesized to engineer the active biosensing platform for developing dopamine biosensors. Initially, the as-synthesized nano-bio-engineered CS@CuI NPs were subjected to its drop-casting onto an Indium tin oxide (ITO) conducting glass substrate. This substrate platform was then utilized to immobilize tyrosinase (Tyr) enzyme by drop-casting to fabricate Tyr/CS@CuI NPs/ITO bioelectrode for the ultrasensitive determination of dopamine. Several techniques were used to characterize the structural, optical, and morphological properties of the synthesized CS@CuI NPs and Tyr/CS@CuI NPs/ITO bioelectrode. Further, the as-prepared bioelectrode was evaluated for its suitability and electrocatalytic behaviour towards dopamine by cyclic voltammetry. A perusal of the electroanalytic results of the fabricated biosensor revealed that under the optimized experimental conditions, Tyr/CS@CuI NPs/ITO bioelectrode exhibits a very high electrochemical sensitivity of 11.64 μA μM<sup>-1</sup> cm<sup>-2</sup> towards dopamine with the low limit of detection and quantification of 0.02 and 0.386 μM, respectively. In addition, the fabricated bioelectrode was stable up to 46 days with only 4.82 % current loss, reusable till 20 scans, and it also performed effectively while real sample analysis. Therefore, the nano-bio-engineered biosensor platform being reported can determine deficient dopamine levels in a very selective and sensitive manner, which can help adequately manage neurodegenerative disorders, further slowing down the disease progression.