Title: Contribution of the Dynamic Intestinal Absorption Model (Diamod) to the Development of a Patient-Centric Drug Formulation.
PMID: 37955627

Abstract:
Compound X is a weak basic drug targeting the early stages of Parkinson's disease, for which a theoretical risk assessment has indicated that elevated gastric pH conditions could potentially result in reduced plasma concentrations. Different in vitro dissolution methodologies varying in level of complexity and a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) absorption model demonstrated that the dissolution, solubility, and intestinal absorption of compound X was indeed reduced under elevated gastric pH conditions. These observations were confirmed in a crossover pharmacokinetic study in Beagle dogs. As a result, the development of a formulation resulting in robust performance that is not sensitive to the exposed gastric pH levels is of crucial importance. The dynamic intestinal absorption MODel (Diamod), an advanced in vitro gastrointestinal transfer tool that allows to study the gastrointestinal dissolution and interconnected permeation of drugs, was selected as an in vitro tool for the formulation optimization activities given its promising predictive capacity and its capability to generate insights into the mechanisms driving formulation performance. Different pH-modifiers were screened for their potential to mitigate the pH-effect by decreasing the microenvironmental pH at the dissolution surface. Finally, an optimized formulation containing a clinically relevant dose of the drug and a functional amount of the selected pH-modifier was evaluated for its performance in the Diamod. This monolayer tablet formulation resulted in rapid gastric dissolution and supersaturation, inducing adequate intestinal supersaturation and permeation of compound X, irrespective of the gastric acidity level in the stomach. In conclusion, this study describes the holistic biopharmaceutics approach driving the development of a patient-centric formulation of compound X.