Title: Developmental exposure to the Parkinson's disease-associated organochlorine pesticide dieldrin alters dopamine neurotransmission in α-synuclein pre-formed fibril (PFF)-injected mice.
PMID: 37607008

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the fastest-growing neurological disease worldwide, with increases outpacing aging and occurring most rapidly in recently industrialized areas, suggesting a role of environmental factors. Epidemiological, post-mortem, and mechanistic studies suggest that persistent organic pollutants, including the organochlorine pesticide dieldrin, increase PD risk. In mice, developmental dieldrin exposure causes male-specific exacerbation of neuronal susceptibility to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and synucleinopathy. Specifically, in the α-synuclein (α-syn) pre-formed fibril (PFF) model, exposure leads to increased deficits in striatal dopamine (DA) turnover and motor deficits on the challenging beam. Here, we hypothesized that alterations in DA handling contribute to the observed changes and assessed vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) function and DA release in this dieldrin/PFF 2-hit model. Female C57BL/6 mice were exposed to 0.3 mg/kg dieldrin or vehicle every 3 days by feeding, starting at 8 weeks of age and continuing throughout breeding, gestation, and lactation. Male offspring from independent litters underwent unilateral, intrastriatal injections of α-syn PFFs at 12 weeks of age, and vesicular 3H-DA uptake assays and fast-scan cyclic voltammetry were performed 4 months post-PFF injection. Dieldrin-induced an increase in DA release in striatal slices in PFF-injected animals, but no change in VMAT2 activity. These results suggest that developmental dieldrin exposure increases a compensatory response to synucleinopathy-triggered striatal DA loss. These findings are consistent with silent neurotoxicity, where developmental exposure to dieldrin primes the nigrostriatal striatal system to have an exacerbated response to synucleinopathy in the absence of observable changes in typical markers of nigrostriatal dysfunction and degeneration.