Title: Differential Effects of the Processed and Unprocessed Garlic (<i>Allium sativum</i> L.) Ethanol Extracts on Neuritogenesis and Synaptogenesis in Rat Primary Hippocampal Neurons.
PMID: 37686193

Abstract:
Garlic (<i>Allium sativum</i> L.) is an aromatic herb known for its culinary and medicinal uses for centuries. Both unprocessed (white) and processed (black) garlic are known to protect against the pathobiology of neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), which has been attributed to their anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. The information on the effects of processed and unprocessed garlic on neuronal process outgrowth, maturation, and synaptic development is limited. This study aimed at investigating and comparing the effects of the ethanol extracts of unprocessed (white garlic extract, WGE) and processed (black garlic extract, BGE) garlic on the maturation of primary hippocampal neurons. Neurite outgrowth was stimulated in a dose-dependent manner by both WGE and BGE and the most effective doses were 15 μg/mL and 60 μg/mL, respectively, without showing cytotoxicity. At this optimal concentration, both extracts promoted axonal and dendritic growth and maturation. Furthermore, both extracts substantially increased the formation of functional synapses. However, the effect of WGE was more robust at every developmental stage of neurons. In addition, the gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis revealed a chemical profile of various bioactives in both BGE and WGE. Linalool, a compound that was found in both extracts, has shown neurite outgrowth-promoting activity in neuronal cultures, suggesting that the neurotrophic activity of garlic extracts is attributed, at least in part, to this compound. By using network pharmacology, linalool's role in neuronal development can also be observed through its modulatory effect on the signaling molecules of neurotrophic signaling pathways such as glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3β), extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (Erk1/2), which was further verified by immunocytochemistry. Overall, these findings provide information on the molecular mechanism of processed and unprocessed garlic for neuronal growth, survival, and memory function which may have the potential for the prevention of several neurological disorders.