Title: Divergent patterns of healthy aging across human brain regions at single-cell resolution reveal links to neurodegenerative disease.
PMID: 37577533

Abstract:
Age is a major common risk factor underlying neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Previous studies reported that chronological age correlates with differential gene expression across different brain regions. However, prior datasets have not disambiguated whether expression associations with age are due to changes in cell numbers and/or gene expression per cell. In this study, we leveraged single nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNAseq) to examine changes in cell proportions and transcriptomes in four different brain regions, each from 12 donors aged 20-30 years (young) or 60-85 years (old). We sampled 155,192 nuclei from two cortical regions (entorhinal cortex and middle temporal gyrus) and two subcortical regions (putamen and subventricular zone) relevant to neurodegenerative diseases or the proliferative niche. We found no changes in cellular composition of different brain regions with healthy aging. Surprisingly, we did find that each brain region has a distinct aging signature, with only minor overlap in differentially associated genes across regions. Moreover, each cell type shows distinct age-associated expression changes, including loss of protein synthesis genes in cortical inhibitory neurons, axonogenesis genes in excitatory neurons and oligodendrocyte precursor cells, enhanced gliosis markers in astrocytes and disease-associated markers in microglia, and genes critical for neuron-glia communication. Importantly, we find cell type-specific enrichments of age associations with genes nominated by Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease genome-wide association studies (GWAS), such as apolipoprotein E (<i>APOE</i>), and leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (<i>LRRK2</i>) in microglia that are independent of overall expression levels across cell types. We present this data as a new resource which highlights, first, region- and cell type-specific transcriptomic changes in healthy aging that may contribute to selective vulnerability and, second, provide context for testing GWAS-nominated disease risk genes in relevant subtypes and developing more targeted therapeutic strategies. The data is readily accessible without requirement for extensive computational support in a public website, https://brainexp-hykyffa56a-uc.a.run.app/.