Title: Dopamine agonists in Parkinson's disease: Impact of D1-like or D2-like dopamine receptor subtype selectivity and avenues for future treatment.
PMID: 37497384

Abstract:
Dopamine agonists (DAs) have demonstrated efficacy for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD) but are limited by adverse effects (AEs). DAs can vary considerably in their receptor subtype selectivity and affinity, chemical composition, receptor occupancy, and intrinsic activity on the receptor. Most currently approved DAs for PD treatment primarily target D2/D3 (D2-like) dopamine receptors. However, selective activation of D1/D5 (D1-like) dopamine receptors may enable robust activation of motor function while avoiding AEs related to D2/D3 receptor agonism. Full D1/D5 receptor-selective agonists have been explored in small, early-phase clinical studies, and although their efficacy for motor symptoms was robust, challenges with pharmacokinetics, bioavailability, cardiovascular AEs, and dyskinesia rates similar to levodopa prevented clinical advancement. Generally, repeated dopaminergic stimulation with full DAs is associated with frontostriatal dysfunction and sensitization that may induce plastic changes in the motor system, and neuroadaptations that produce long-term motor and nonmotor complications, respectively. Recent preclinical and clinical studies suggest that a D1/D5 receptor-selective partial agonist may hold promise for providing sustained, predictable, and robust motor control, while reducing risk for motor complications (e.g., levodopa-induced dyskinesia) and nonmotor AEs (e.g., impulse control disorders and excessive daytime sleepiness). Clinical trials are ongoing to evaluate this hypothesis. The potential emerging availability of novel dopamine receptor agonists with selective dopamine receptor pharmacology suggests that the older terminology "dopamine agonist" may need revision to distinguish older-generation D2/D3-selective agonists from D1/D5-selective agonists with distinct efficacy and tolerability characteristics.