Title: Emerging Role of Long Noncoding RNAs in Regulating Inflammasome-Mediated Neurodegeneration in Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 38105409

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the complex neurodegenerative disorders, primarily characterized by motor deficits, including bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity, and postural instability. The underlying pathophysiology involves the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra pars compacta, leading to dopamine depletion in the basal ganglia circuitry. While motor symptoms are hallmark features of PD, emerging research highlights a wide range of non-motor symptoms, including cognitive impairments, mood disturbances, and autonomic dysfunctions. Inflammasome activation is pivotal in inducing neuroinflammation and promoting disease onset, progression, and severity of PD. Several studies have shown that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) modulate inflammasomes in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Dysregulation of lncRNAs is linked to aberrant gene expression and cellular processes in neurodegeneration, causing the activation of inflammasomes that contribute to neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Inflammasomes are cytosolic proteins that form complexes upon activation, inducing inflammation and neuronal cell death. This review explores the significance of lncRNAs in regulating inflammasomes in PD, primarily focusing on specific lncRNAs such as nuclear paraspeckle assembly transcript 1 (NEATNEAT1), X-inactive specific transcript (XIST), growth arrest-specific 5 (GAS5), and HOX transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), which have been shown to activate or inhibit the NLRP3 inflammasome and induce the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Moreover, some lncRNAs mediate inflammasome activation through miRNA interactions. Understanding the roles of lncRNAs in inflammasome regulation provides new therapeutic targets for controlling neuroinflammation and reducing the progression of neurodegeneration. Identifying lncRNA-mediated regulatory pathways paves the way for novel therapies in the battle against these devastating neurodegenerative disorders.