Title: Empagliflozin repurposing in Parkinson's disease; modulation of oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, AMPK/SIRT-1/PGC-1α, and wnt/β-catenin pathways.
PMID: 38038781

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease is a neuroprogressive disorder characterized by loss of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra pars compacta. Empagliflozin (EMPA), a SGLT-2 inhibitor, is an oral hypoglycemic agent with reported anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. The current study aimed to evaluate the neuroprotective effect of EMPA in rotenone-induced Parkinson's disease. Rats were randomly distributed among five groups as follows: control, rotenone (2 mg/kg), rotenone + EMPA (10 mg/kg), rotenone + EMPA (20 mg/kg), and EMPA (20 mg/kg) groups. They were treated for 30 consecutive days. Rotenone reduced locomotor activity and retention time on the rotarod performance test while elongated descent latency time. On the other side, EMPA corrected these behavioral changes. These results were confirmed by histological examination and number of intact neurons. Moreover, rotenone induced alpha-synuclein accumulation, reduced tyrosine hydroxylase expression, dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, and homovanillic acid concentrations. On the other side, EMPA reversed such effects induced by rotenone. Depending on previous results, EMPA (20 mg/kg) was selected for further mechanistic studies. Rotenone ameliorated superoxide dismutase and catalase activities and enhanced lipid peroxidation, interleukin-1β, and tumor necrosis factor-α levels. By contrast, EMPA opposed rotenone-induced effects on oxidative stress and inflammation. Besides, rotenone reduced the expression of pAMP-activated protein kinase (pAMPK), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1α (PGC-1α), and Sirtuin-1 (SIRT-1), as well as abrogated NAD<sup>+</sup>/NADH ratio. However, EMPA activated the AMPK/SIRT-1/PGC-1α pathway. Moreover, rotenone hindered the wnt/β-catenin pathway by reducing the wnt-3a level and β-catenin expression. On the other side, EMPA triggered activation of the wnt/β-catenin pathway. Collectively, EMPA may provide a promising solution for Parkinson's patients worldwide.