Title: Endogenous GDNF Is Unable to Halt Dopaminergic Injury Triggered by Microglial Activation.
PMID: 38201277

Abstract:
Overactivation of microglial cells seems to play a crucial role in the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons occurring in Parkinson's disease. We have previously demonstrated that glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) present in astrocytes secretome modulates microglial responses induced by an inflammatory insult. Therefore, astrocyte-derived soluble factors may include relevant molecular players of therapeutic interest in the control of excessive neuroinflammatory responses. However, in vivo, the control of neuroinflammation is more complex as it depends on the interaction between different types of cells other than microglia and astrocytes. Whether neurons may interfere in the astrocyte-microglia crosstalk, affecting the control of microglial reactivity exerted by astrocytes, is unclear. Therefore, the present work aimed to disclose if the control of microglial responses mediated by astrocyte-derived factors, including GDNF, could be affected by the crosstalk with neurons, impacting GDNF's ability to protect dopaminergic neurons exposed to a pro-inflammatory environment. Also, we aimed to disclose if the protection of dopaminergic neurons by GDNF involves the modulation of microglial cells. Our results show that the neuroprotective effect of GDNF was mediated, at least in part, by a direct action on microglial cells through the GDNF family receptor α-1. However, this protective effect seems to be impaired by other mediators released in response to the neuron-astrocyte crosstalk since neuron-astrocyte secretome, in contrast to astrocytes secretome, was unable to protect dopaminergic neurons from the injury triggered by lipopolysaccharide-activated microglia. Supplementation with exogenous GDNF was needed to afford protection of dopaminergic neurons exposed to the inflammatory environment. In conclusion, our results revealed that dopaminergic protective effects promoted by GDNF involve the control of microglial reactivity. However, endogenous GDNF is insufficient to confer dopaminergic neuron protection against an inflammatory insult. This reinforces the importance of further developing new therapeutic strategies aiming at providing GDNF or enhancing its expression in the brain regions affected by Parkinson's disease.