Title: Externally validated deep learning model to identify prodromal Parkinson's disease from electrocardiogram.
PMID: 37516770

Abstract:
Little is known about electrocardiogram (ECG) markers of Parkinson's disease (PD) during the prodromal stage. The aim of the study was to build a generalizable ECG-based fully automatic artificial intelligence (AI) model to predict PD risk during the prodromal stage, up to 5 years before disease diagnosis. This case-control study included samples from Loyola University Chicago (LUC) and University of Tennessee-Methodist Le Bonheur Healthcare (MLH). Cases and controls were matched according to specific characteristics (date, age, sex and race). Clinical data were available from May, 2014 onward at LUC and from January, 2015 onward at MLH, while the ECG data were available as early as 1990 in both institutes. PD was denoted by at least two primary diagnostic codes (ICD9 332.0; ICD10 G20) at least 30 days apart. PD incidence date was defined as the earliest of first PD diagnostic code or PD-related medication prescription. ECGs obtained at least 6 months before PD incidence date were modeled to predict a subsequent diagnosis of PD within three time windows: 6 months-1 year, 6 months-3 years, and 6 months-5 years. We applied a novel deep neural network using standard 10-s 12-lead ECGs to predict PD risk at the prodromal phase. This model was compared to multiple feature engineering-based models. Subgroup analyses for sex, race and age were also performed. Our primary prediction model was a one-dimensional convolutional neural network (1D-CNN) that was built using 131 cases and 1058 controls from MLH, and externally validated on 29 cases and 165 controls from LUC. The model was trained on 90% of the MLH data, internally validated on the remaining 10% and externally validated on LUC data. The best performing model resulted in an external validation AUC of 0.67 when predicting future PD at any time between 6 months and 5 years after the ECG. Accuracy increased when restricted to ECGs obtained within 6 months to 3 years before PD diagnosis (AUC 0.69) and was highest when predicting future PD within 6 months to 1 year (AUC 0.74). The 1D-CNN model based on raw ECG data outperformed multiple models built using more standard ECG feature engineering approaches. These results demonstrate that a predictive model developed in one cohort using only raw 10-s ECGs can effectively classify individuals with prodromal PD in an independent cohort, particularly closer to disease diagnosis. Standard ECGs may help identify individuals with prodromal PD for cost-effective population-level early detection and inclusion in disease-modifying therapeutic trials.