Title: Huperzine A injection ameliorates motor and cognitive abnormalities via regulating multiple pathways in a murine model of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 37549727

Abstract:
As a common progressive neurodegenerative disorder, the satisfied therapies for Parkinson's disease (PD) are still unavailable. As a natural acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, the neuroprotective characteristic of Huperzine A (HupA) was supported by previous studies. However, questions remain on whether HupA injection (HAI, a main preparation of HupA) intervention conduces to PD treatment and if so, the potential molecular mechanisms. In this study, the efficacies of HAI treatment on PD-like pathological phenotypes were evaluated in a MPTP-induced PD murine model. The network pharmacology, transcriptome sequencing and experimental verification were integrated to comprehensively reveal the primary molecular mechanisms. Therapeutically, HAI intervention significantly improved the impaired locomotor behaviors as well as learning and memory abilities, and prevented the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of PD mice. The network pharmacology analysis combined with experimental results showed that HAI treatment could effectively restore the disordered transcriptional levels of inflammatory factors and apoptosis related genes in the SNpc and striatum tissues of PD mice. Transcriptome sequencing results found that inflammation and oxidative phosphorylation served as significant functional mechanisms involved in HAI administration. The experimental verification indicated that HAI treatment effectively regulated the abnormal transcription levels of inflammation and oxidative phosphorylation related hub genes in the hippocampal samples of PD mice. In addition, molecular docking suggested strong affinity between HupA and the above core targets. Overall, this work displayed the reliable therapeutic effects of HAI on ameliorating the pathological symptoms of PD mice via modulating multiple pathways. The current findings were expected to provide a potential anti-PD agent.