Title: Insomnia in neurological disorders: Prevalence, mechanisms, impact and treatment approaches.
PMID: 37620177

Abstract:
Insomnia is more prevalent in neurological disorders compared to the general population, with rates ranging from 11 to 74.2% in neurodegenerative disorders, 20 to 37% in vascular diseases, 13.3 to 50% in inflammatory diseases, 28.9 to 74.4% in epilepsy, and nearly 70% in migraines. Insomnia in neurological disorders stems from a variety of factors, encompassing physical and neuropsychiatric factors, behavioral patterns, and disruptions in the biological clock and circadian rhythm. There are bidirectional connections between neurological disorders and insomnia. Insomnia in neurological disorders worsens symptoms, resulting in heightened depressive symptoms, elevated mortality rates, reduced quality of life, and intensified acute symptoms. Managing comorbid sleep disorders, especially in the presence of psychiatric comorbidities, is crucial. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) is the first-line recommendation for insomnia management in neurological disorders. Other treatments are second-line strategies. Melatonin may demonstrate effectiveness in addressing insomnia, with soporific and chronobiotic effects. Furthermore, it has the potential to alleviate "sundowning" and behavioral disturbances, while generally being well-tolerated. Other treatment options that may be of interest include morning bright light therapy, sedative antidepressants, new orexin dual antagonists and levodopa specifically indicated for Parkinson's disease. Benzodiazepines and z-drugs can be used primarily during acute phases to prevent pharmacotolerance and minimize side effects. However, they should be avoided in patients with neurological disorders and not used in patients over 75 years old due to the risk of falls and confusion. In neurological disorders, insomnia has a profound impact on daytime functioning, making its management crucial. Effective treatment can result in improved outcomes, and additional research is necessary to investigate alternative therapeutic options and enhance patient care.