Title: Intranasal inorganic cerium oxide nanoparticles ameliorate oxidative stress induced motor manifestations in haloperidol-induced parkinsonism.
PMID: 37432554

Abstract:
Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CONPs), owing to their radical scavenging property, have recently emerged as a therapeutic candidate for oxidative stress-mediated neurological diseases. However, oral and intravenous administration of CONPs is limited due to their poor physicochemical characteristics, low bioavailability, rapid systemic clearance, poor blood-brain penetration and dose-dependent toxicity. To overcome these challenges, we developed intranasal CONPs and evaluated their potential in the experimental PD model. CONPs were prepared by homogenous precipitation using tween 80 as a stabilizer and methanol/water as solvent. The optimization was done using Central Composite Design (CCD). The CONPs synthesis was confirmed by UV and FTIR. The optimized CONPs were small-sized (105.1 ± 5.78 nm), spherical (TEM), uniform (PDI, 0.119 ± 0.006) and stable (ZP, -22.7 ± 1.02 mV). Energy-dispersive X-ray analysis showed characteristic signals of Ce in developed CONPs. The X-ray diffraction pattern described the cubic fluorite structure and nano-crystalline nature of CONPs. The CONP anti-oxidant activity was found to be 93.60 ± 0.32% at 25 µg/mL concentration. Finally, motor manifestation studies like the forced swim test, locomotor test, akinesia, catalepsy, and muscle coordination test were conducted to assess the motor dysfunctions and behavioral activity in all four animal groups. Results of the in vivo motor manifestation studies in the haloperidol-induced PD rat model showed that co-administration of intranasal CONPs along with a half dose of levodopa resulted in significant protection, and results were significantly different from the untreated group but not significantly different from the healthy group. In conclusion, intranasal CONPs can be useful in ameliorating oxidative stress through their antioxidant effect and could be prospective therapeutics for the treatment of motor manifestations in Parkinson's disease.