Title: Kaempferol, a potential neuroprotective agent in neurodegenerative diseases: From chemistry to medicine.
PMID: 37494786

Abstract:
Neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) encompass a range of conditions that involve progressive deterioration and dysfunction of the nervous system. Some of the common NDDs include Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Although significant progress has been made in understanding the pathological mechanisms of NDDs in recent years, the development of targeted and effective drugs for their treatment remains challenging. Kaempferol is a flavonoid whose derivatives include kaempferol-O-rhamnoside, 3-O-β-rutinoside/6-hydroxykaempferol 3,6-di-O-β-d-glucoside, and kaempferide. Emerging studies have suggested that kaempferol and its derivatives possess neuroprotective properties and may have potential therapeutic benefits in NDDs. Here, we aimed to provide a theoretical basis for the use of kaempferol and its derivatives in the clinical treatment of NDDs. We systematically reviewed the literature in the PubMed, Web of Science, and Science Direct databases until June 2022 using the search terms "kaempferol," "kaempferol derivatives," "NDDs," "pharmacokinetics," and "biosynthesis" according to the reporting items for systematic review (PRISMA) standard. Based on combined results of in vivo and in vitro studies, we summarize the basic mechanisms and targets of kaempferol and its derivatives in the management of AD, PD, HD, and ALS. Kaempferol and its derivatives exert a neuroprotective role mainly by preventing the deposition of amyloid fibrils (such as Aβ, tau, and α-synuclein), inhibiting microglia activation, reducing the release of inflammatory factors, restoring the mitochondrial membrane to prevent oxidative stress, protecting the blood-brain barrier, and inhibiting specific enzyme activities (such as cholinesterase). Kaempferol and its derivatives are promising natural neuroprotective agents. By determining their pharmacological mechanism, kaempferol and its derivatives may be new candidate drugs for the treatment of NDDs.