Title: Kynurenine attenuates mitochondrial depolarization and neuronal cell death induced by rotenone exposure independently of AhR-mediated parkin induction in SH-SY5Y differentiated cells.
PMID: 37979659

Abstract:
Rotenone is a pesticide commonly used in agriculture that is associated with the risk of developing Parkinson's disease (PD) by inducing mitochondrial damage. As a protective cell response to different challenges, they activate mitophagy, which involves parkin activity. Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase necessary in the initial steps of mitophagy, and its overexpression protects against parkinsonian effects in different models. Recent studies have reported that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor, induces parkin expression. Kynurenine, an endogenous AHR ligand, promotes neuroprotection in chronic neurodegenerative disorders, such as PD, although its neuroprotective mechanism needs to be fully understood. Therefore, we evaluated whether the overexpression of parkin by AHR activation with kynurenine promotes autophagy and reduces the neurotoxicity induced by rotenone in SH-SY5Y cells differentiated to dopaminergic neurons. SH-SY5Y neurons were treated with rotenone or pretreated with kynurenine or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), and parkin levels, apoptosis, mitochondrial potential membrane, and autophagy were determined. The results showed that kynurenine and TCDD treatments induced parkin expression in an AHR-dependent manner. Kynurenine pretreatment inhibited rotenone-induced neuronal apoptosis in 17%, and the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential in 30% when compare to rotenone alone, together with a decrease in autophagy. By contrast, although TCDD treatment increased parkin levels, non-neuroprotective effects were observed. The kynurenine protective activity was AHR independent, suggesting that parkin induction might not be related to this effect. On the other hand, kynurenine treatment inhibited alpha amine-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazol propionic acid and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, which are well-known excitotoxicity mediators activated by rotenone exposure.