Title: Machine Learning-Based Detection of Parkinson's Disease From Resting-State EEG: A Multi-Center Study.
PMID: 38083565

Abstract:
Resting-state EEG (rs-EEG) has been demonstrated to aid in Parkinson's disease (PD) diagnosis. In particular, the power spectral density (PSD) of low-frequency bands (δ and θ) and high-frequency bands (α and β) has been shown to be significantly different in patients with PD as compared to subjects without PD (non-PD). However, rs-EEG feature extraction and the interpretation thereof can be time-intensive and prone to examiner variability. Machine learning (ML) has the potential to automatize the analysis of rs-EEG recordings and provides a supportive tool for clinicians to ease their workload. In this work, we use rs-EEG recordings of 84 PD and 85 non-PD subjects pooled from four datasets obtained at different centers. We propose an end-to-end pipeline consisting of preprocessing, extraction of PSD features from clinically-validated frequency bands, and feature selection. Following, we assess the classification ability of the features via ML algorithms to stratify between PD and non-PD subjects. Further, we evaluate the effect of feature harmonization, given the multi-center nature of the datasets. Our validation results show, on average, an improvement in PD detection ability (69.6% vs. 75.5% accuracy) by logistic regression when harmonizing the features and performing univariate feature selection (k = 202 features). Our final results show an average global accuracy of 72.2% with balanced accuracy results for all the centers included in the study: 60.6%, 68.7%, 77.7%, and 82.2%, respectively.Clinical relevance- We present an end-to-end pipeline to extract clinically relevant features from rs-EEG recordings that can facilitate the analysis and detection of PD. Further, we provide an ML system that shows a good performance in detecting PD, even in the presence of centers with different acquisition protocols. Our results show the relevance of harmonizing features and provide a good starting point for future studies focusing on rs-EEG analysis and multi-center data.