Title: Nanodelivery of Histamine H3/H4 Receptor Modulators BF-2649 and Clobenpropit with Antibodies to Amyloid Beta Peptide in Combination with Alpha Synuclein Reduces Brain Pathology in Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 37480459

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) in military personnel engaged in combat operations is likely to develop in their later lives. In order to enhance the quality of lives of PD patients, exploration of novel therapy based on new research strategies is highly warranted. The hallmarks of PD include increased alpha synuclein (ASNC) and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leading to brain pathology. In addition, there are evidences showing increased histaminergic nerve fibers in substantia niagra pars compacta (SNpc), striatum (STr), and caudate putamen (CP) associated with upregulation of histamine H3 receptors and downregulation of H4 receptors in human brain. Previous studies from our group showed that modulation of potent histaminergic H3 receptor inverse agonist BF-2549 or clobenpropit (CLBPT) partial histamine H4 agonist with H3 receptor antagonist induces neuroprotection in PD brain pathology. Recent studies show that PD also enhances amyloid beta peptide (AβP) depositions in brain. Keeping these views in consideration in this review, nanowired delivery of monoclonal antibodies to AβP together with ASNC and H3/H4 modulator drugs on PD brain pathology is discussed based on our own observations. Our investigation shows that TiO<sub>2</sub> nanowired BF-2649 (1 mg/kg, i.p.) or CLBPT (1 mg/kg, i.p.) once daily for 1 week together with nanowired delivery of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to AβP and ASNC induced superior neuroprotection in PD-induced brain pathology. These observations are the first to show the modulation of histaminergic receptors together with antibodies to AβP and ASNC induces superior neuroprotection in PD. These observations open new avenues for the development of novel drug therapies for clinical strategies in PD.