Title: Neither alpha-synuclein-preformed fibrils derived from patients with <i>GBA1</i> mutations nor the host murine genotype significantly influence seeding efficacy in the mouse olfactory bulb.
PMID: 37662402

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive motor symptoms and alpha-synuclein (αsyn) aggregation in the nervous system. For unclear reasons, PD patients with certain GBA mutations (GBA-PD) have a more aggressive clinical progression. Two testable hypotheses that can potentially account for this phenomenon are that <i>GBA1</i> mutations promote αsyn spread or drive the generation of highly pathogenic αsyn polymorphs (i.e., strains). We tested these hypotheses by treating homozygous <i>GBA1</i> D409V knockin (KI) mice with human α-syn-preformed fibrils (PFFs) and treating wild-type mice (WT) with several αsyn-PFF polymorphs amplified from brain autopsy samples collected from patients with idiopathic PD and GBA-PD patients with either homozygous or heterozygous <i>GBA1</i> mutations. Robust phosphorylated-αsyn (PSER129) positive pathology was observed at the injection site (i.e., the olfactory bulb granular layer) and throughout the brain six months following PFF injection. The PFF seeding efficiency and degree of spread were similar regardless of the mouse genotype or PFF polymorphs. We found that PFFs amplified from the human brain, regardless of patient genotype, were generally more effective seeders than wholly synthetic PFFs (i.e., non-amplified); however, PFF concentration differed between these two studies, and this might also account for the observed differences. To investigate whether the molecular composition of pathology differed between different seeding conditions, we permed Biotinylation by Antibody Recognition on PSER129 (BAR-PSER129). We found that for BAR-PSER129, the endogenous PSER129 pool dominated identified interactions, and thus, very few potential interactions were explicitly identified for seeded pathology. However, we found Dctn2 interaction was shared across all PFF conditions, and Nckap1 and Ap3b2 were unique to PFFs amplified from GBA-PD brains of heterozygous mutation carriers. In conclusion, both the genotype and αsyn strain had little effect on overall seeding efficacy and global PSER129-interactions.