Title: Neuroprotective and Anti-inflammatory Effects of Rubiscolin-6 Analogs with Proline Surrogates in Position 2.
PMID: 38117448

Abstract:
Naturally occurring peptides, such as rubiscolins derived from spinach leaves, have been shown to possess some interesting activities. They exerted central effects, such as antinociception, memory consolidation and anxiolytic-like activity. The fact that rubiscolins are potent even when given orally makes them very promising drug candidates. The present work tested whether rubiscolin-6 (R-6, Tyr-Pro-Leu-Asp-Leu-Phe) analogs have neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory effects. These hypotheses were tested in the 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) injury model of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated RAW 264.7 macrophages. The determination of reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), Caspase-3 activity, lipid peroxidation and nitric oxide (NO) production allowed us to determine the effects of peptides on hallmarks related to Parkinson's Disease (PD) and inflammation. Additionally, we investigated the impact of R-6 analogs on serine-threonine kinase (also known as protein kinase B, AKT) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activation. The treatment with analogs 3 (Tyr-Inp-Leu-Asp-Leu-Phe-OH), 5 (Dmt-Inp-Leu-Asp-Leu-Phe-OH) and 7 (Tyr-Inp-Leu-Asp-Leu-Phe-NH<sub>2</sub>) most effectively prevented neuronal death via attenuation of ROS, mitochondrial dysfunction and Caspase-3 activity. Peptides 5 and 7 significantly increased the protein expression of the phosphorylated-AKT (p-AKT) and phosphorylated-mTOR (p-mTOR). Additionally, selected analogs could also ameliorate LPS-mediated inflammation in macrophages via inhibition of intracellular generation of ROS and NO production. Our findings suggest that R-6 analogs exert protective effects, possibly related to an anti-oxidation mechanism in in vitro model of PD. The data shows that the most potent peptides can inhibit 6-OHDA injury by activating the PI3-K/AKT/mTOR pathway, thus playing a neuroprotective role and may provide a rational and robust approach in the design of new therapeutics or even functional foods.