Title: Neuromelanin-sensitive MRI correlates of cognitive and motor function in Parkinson's disease with freezing of gait.
PMID: 37461735

Abstract:
Substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and locus coeruleus (LC) are neuromelanin-rich nuclei implicated in diverse cognitive and motor processes in normal brain function and disease. However, their roles in aging and neurodegenerative disease mechanisms have remained unclear due to a lack of tools to study them <i>in vivo</i>. Preclinical and post-mortem human investigations indicate that the relationship between tissue neuromelanin content and neurodegeneration is complex. Neuromelanin exhibits both neuroprotective and cytotoxic characteristics, and tissue neuromelanin content varies across the lifespan, exhibiting an inverted U-shaped relationship with age. Neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) is an emerging modality that allows measurement of neuromelanin-associated contrast in SNc and LC in humans. NM-MRI robustly detects disease effects in these structures in neurodegenerative and psychiatric conditions, including Parkinson's disease (PD). Previous NM-MRI studies of PD have largely focused on detecting disease group effects, but few studies have reported NM-MRI correlations with phenotype. Because neuromelanin dynamics are complex, we hypothesize that they are best interpreted in the context of both disease stage and aging, with neuromelanin loss correlating with symptoms most clearly in advanced stages where neuromelanin loss and neurodegeneration are coupled. We tested this hypothesis using NM-MRI to measure SNc and LC volumes in healthy older adult control individuals and in PD patients with and without freezing of gait (FOG), a severe and disabling PD symptom. We assessed for group differences and correlations between NM-MRI measures and aging, cognition and motor deficits. SNc volume was significantly decreased in PD with FOG compared to controls. SNc volume correlated significantly with motor symptoms and cognitive measures in PD with FOG, but not in PD without FOG. SNc volume correlated significantly with aging in PD. When PD patients were stratified by disease duration, SNc volume correlated with aging, cognition, and motor deficits only in PD with disease duration >5 years. We conclude that in severe or advanced PD, identified by either FOG or disease duration >5 years, the observed correlations between SNc volume and aging, cognition, and motor function may reflect the coupling of neuromelanin loss with neurodegeneration and the associated emergence of a linear relationship between NM-MRI measures and phenotype.