Title: Neuroprotective potential of Afzelin: A novel approach for alleviating catalepsy and modulating Bcl-2 expression in Parkinson's disease therapy.
PMID: 38261905

Abstract:
The lost dopaminergic neurons in the brain prevent mobility in Parkinson's disease (PD). It is impossible to stop the disease's progress by means of symptoms management. Research focuses on oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and neuronal degeneration. Exploration of potential neuroprotective drugs against prosurvival B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) protein is ongoing. An investigable cause behind PD, as well as preventive measures, could be discovered considering the association between such behavioural manifestations (cataleptic behaviours) and PD. The compound Afzelin, known to guard the nervous system, was chosen for this study. The study was done on rats divided into six different groups. First, there was a control group. The other group was treated with Reserpine (RES) (1 mg/kg). The third group received RES (1 mg/kg) and levodopa (30 mg/kg). The remaining three groups were given RES (1 mg/kg) in conjunction with Afzelin at the following doses: 5 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg, and 20 mg/kg. Cataleptic behavior and mobility in rats was assessed using the rotarod, open field, and modified forced-swim tests. thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), nitric oxide (NO), biogenic amines, and Bcl-2 level in rat tissue homogenates were considered. According to the study's findings, the rats treated through co-administration of RES and Afzelin improved significantly in their cataleptic behaviours and locomotor activity. In addition, administering Afzelin itself caused Bcl-2 expression, which could have some neuroprotection properties. This study provides meaningful information on the effectiveness of Afzelin in handling catalepsy and other degenerative neurologic disorders. As a result, other studies need to be conducted to establish the reasons behind the reactions and determine the long-term effects of Afzelin on these conditions.