Title: Neuroprotective role for RORA in Parkinson's disease revealed by analysis of post-mortem brain and a dopaminergic cell line.
PMID: 37500636

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is almost twice as prevalent in men, which has largely been attributed to neuroprotective effect of oestradiol in women. RORA (retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor alpha) regulates the transcription of central aromatase, the enzyme responsible for local oestradiol synthesis, simultaneously, RORA expression is regulated by sex hormones. Moreover, RORA protects neurones against oxidative stress, a key mechanism contributing to the loss of dopaminergic neurones in PD. Therefore, we hypothesized that there would be sex differences in RORA expression in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc), which could contribute to sex differences observed in PD prevalence and pathogenesis. In a case control study, qPCR and western blot analyses were used to quantify gene and protein expression in the SNpc of post-mortem brains (n = 14 late-stage PD and 11 age and sex matched controls). The neuroprotective properties of a RORA agonist were then investigated directly using a cell culture toxin-based model of PD coupled with measures of viability, mitochondrial function and apoptosis. RORA was expressed at significantly higher levels in the SNpc from control females' brains compared to males. In PD, we found a significant increase in SNpc RORA expression in male PD compared to female PD. Treatment with a RORA agonist showed a significant neuroprotection in our cell culture model of PD and revealed significant effects on intracellular factors involved in neuronal survival and demise. This study is the first to demonstrate a sex specific pattern of RORA protein and gene expression in the SNpc of controls post-mortem human brains, and to show that this is differentially altered in male and female PD subjects, thus supporting a role for RORA in sex-specific aspects of PD. Furthermore, our in vitro PD model indicates mechanisms whereby a RORA agonist exerts its neuroprotective effect, thereby highlighting the translational potential for RORA ligands in PD.