Title: Neurological Insights into Sleep Disorders in Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 37626558

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common multidimensional neurological disorder characterized by motor and non-motor features and is more prevalent in the elderly. Sleep disorders and cognitive disturbances are also significant characteristics of PD. Sleep is an important physiological process for normal human cognition and physical functioning. Sleep deprivation negatively impacts human physical, mental, and behavioral functions. Sleep disturbances include problems falling asleep, disturbances occurring during sleep, abnormal movements during sleep, insufficient sleep, and excessive sleep. The most recognizable and known sleep disorders, such as rapid-eye-movement behavior disorder (RBD), insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), restless legs syndrome (RLS), sleep-related breathing disorders (SRBDs), and circadian-rhythm-related sleep-wake disorders (CRSWDs), have been associated with PD. RBD and associated emotional disorders are common non-motor symptoms of PD. In individuals, sleep disorders and cognitive impairment are important prognostic factors for predicting progressing neurodegeneration and developing dementia conditions in PD. Studies have focused on RBD and its associated neurological changes and functional deficits in PD patients. Other risks, such as cognitive decline, anxiety, and depression, are related to RBD. Sleep-disorder diagnosis is challenging, especially in identifying the essential factors that disturb the sleep-wake cycle and the co-existence of other concomitant sleep issues, motor symptoms, and breathing disorders. Focusing on sleep patterns and their disturbances, including genetic and other neurochemical changes, helps us to better understand the central causes of sleep alterations and cognitive functions in PD patients. Relations between α-synuclein aggregation in the brain and gender differences in sleep disorders have been reported. The existing correlation between sleep disorders and levels of α-synuclein in the cerebrospinal fluid indicates the risk of progression of synucleinopathies. Multidirectional approaches are required to correlate sleep disorders and neuropsychiatric symptoms and diagnose sensitive biomarkers for neurodegeneration. The evaluation of sleep pattern disturbances and cognitive impairment may aid in the development of novel and effective treatments for PD.