Title: Optimal subthalamic stimulation sites and related networks for freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 37701817

Abstract:
Freezing of gait is a common and debilitating symptom in Parkinson's disease. Although high-frequency subthalamic deep brain stimulation is an effective treatment for Parkinson's disease, post-operative freezing of gait severity has been reported to alleviate, deteriorate or remain constant. We conducted this study to explore the optimal stimulation sites and related connectivity networks for high-frequency subthalamic deep brain stimulation treating freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease. A total of 76 Parkinson's disease patients with freezing of gait who underwent bilateral high-frequency subthalamic stimulation were retrospectively included. The volumes of tissue activated were estimated based on individual electrode reconstruction. The optimal and sour stimulation sites were calculated at coordinate/voxel/mapping level and mapped to anatomical space based on patient-specific images and stimulation settings. The structural and functional predictive connectivity networks for the change of the post-operative Freezing of Gait-Questionnaire were also identified based on normative connectomes derived from the Parkinson's Progression Marker Initiative database. Leave-one-out cross-validation model validated the above results, and the model remained significant after including covariates. The dorsolateral two-thirds of the subthalamic nucleus was identified as the optimal stimulation site, while the ventrocentral portion of the right subthalamic nucleus and internal capsule surrounding the left central subthalamic nucleus were considered as the sour stimulation sites. Modulation of the fibre tracts connecting to the supplementary motor area, pre-supplementary motor area and pedunculopontine nucleus accounted for the alleviation of freezing of gait, whereas tracts connecting to medial and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices contributed to the deterioration of freezing of gait. The optimal/sour stimulation sites and structural/functional predictive connectivity networks for high-frequency subthalamic deep brain stimulation treating freezing of gait are identified and validated through sizable Parkinson's disease patients in this study. With the growing understanding of stimulation sites and related networks, individualized deep brain stimulation treatment with directional leads will become an optimal choice for Parkinson's disease patients with freezing of gait in the future.