Title: Overlap in synaptic neurological condition susceptibility pathways and the neural pannexin 1 interactome revealed by bioinformatics analyses.
PMID: 37807670

Abstract:
Many neurological conditions exhibit synaptic impairments, suggesting mechanistic convergence. Additionally, the pannexin 1 (PANX1) channel and signaling scaffold is linked to several of these neurological conditions and is an emerging regulator of synaptic development and plasticity; however, its synaptic pathogenic contributions are relatively unexplored. To this end, we explored connections between synaptic neurodevelopmental disorder and neurodegenerative disease susceptibility genes discovered by genome-wide association studies (GWASs), and the neural PANX1 interactome (483 proteins) identified from mouse Neuro2a (N2a) cells. To identify shared susceptibility genes, we compared synaptic suggestive GWAS candidate genes amongst autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease. To further probe PANX1 signaling pathways at the synapse, we used bioinformatics tools to identify PANX1 interactome signaling pathways and protein-protein interaction clusters. To shed light on synaptic disease mechanisms potentially linking PANX1 and these four neurological conditions, we performed additional cross-analyses between gene ontologies enriched for the PANX1 synaptic and disease-susceptibility gene sets. Finally, to explore the regional specificity of synaptic PANX1-neurological condition connections, we identified brain region-specific elevations of synaptic PANX1 interactome and GWAS candidate gene set transcripts. Our results confirm considerable overlap in risk genes for autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia and identify potential commonalities in genetic susceptibility for neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegenerative diseases. Our findings also pinpointed novel putative PANX1 links to synaptic disease-associated pathways, such as regulation of vesicular trafficking and proteostasis, warranting further validation.