Title: Parkinson's disease neurons exhibit alterations in mitochondrial quality control proteins.
PMID: 37553379

Abstract:
Mitochondrial dysfunction has been suggested to contribute to Parkinson's disease pathogenesis, though an understanding of the extent or exact mechanism of this contribution remains elusive. This has been complicated by challenging nature of pathway-based analysis and an inability simultaneously study multiple related proteins within human brain tissue. We used imaging mass cytometry (IMC) to overcome these challenges, measuring multiple protein targets, whilst retaining the spatial relationship between targets in post-mortem midbrain sections. We used IMC to simultaneously interrogate subunits of the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation complexes, and several key signalling pathways important for mitochondrial homoeostasis, in a large cohort of PD patient and control cases. We revealed a generalised and synergistic reduction in mitochondrial quality control proteins in dopaminergic neurons from Parkinson's patients. Further, protein-protein abundance relationships appeared significantly different between PD and disease control tissue. Our data showed a significant reduction in the abundance of PINK1, Parkin and phosphorylated ubiquitin<sup>Ser65</sup>, integral to the mitophagy machinery; two mitochondrial chaperones, HSP60 and PHB1; and regulators of mitochondrial protein synthesis and the unfolded protein response, SIRT3 and TFAM. Further, SIRT3 and PINK1 did not show an adaptive response to an ATP synthase defect in the Parkinson's neurons. We also observed intraneuronal aggregates of phosphorylated ubiquitin<sup>Ser65</sup>, alongside increased abundance of mitochondrial proteases, LONP1 and HTRA2, within the Parkinson's neurons with Lewy body pathology, compared to those without. Taken together, these findings suggest an inability to turnover mitochondria and maintain mitochondrial proteostasis in Parkinson's neurons. This may exacerbate the impact of oxidative phosphorylation defects and ageing related oxidative stress, leading to neuronal degeneration. Our data also suggest that that Lewy pathology may affect mitochondrial quality control regulation through the disturbance of mitophagy and intramitochondrial proteostasis.