Title: Polyvinylpyrrolidone-Capped Copper Oxide Nanoparticles-Anchored Pramipexole Attenuates the Rotenone-Induced Phenotypes in a <i>Drosophila</i> Parkinson's Disease Model.
PMID: 38144104

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive, age-related neurodegenerative disease. The disease is characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, pars compacta of the midbrain. Pramipexole (PPX) is a novel drug used for the treatment of PD. It has a high affinity for the dopamine (DA) D2 receptor subfamily and acts as a targeted mitochondrial antioxidant. It is less effective in the treatment of PD due to its short half-life, highly inconvenient dosing schedule, and long-term side effects. In recent years, PPX-loaded nanoformulations have been actively reported to overcome these limitations. In the current study, we focused on increasing the effectiveness of PPX by minimizing the dosing frequency and improving the treatment strategy for PD. Herein, we report the synthesis of biodegradable polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-capped copper oxide nanoparticles (PVP-CuO NPs), followed by PPX anchoring on the surface of the PVP-CuO NPs (PPX-PVP-CuO NC), in a simple and inexpensive method. The newly formulated PPX-PVP-CuO NC complex was analyzed for its chemical and physical properties. The PPX-PVP-CuO NC was tested to protect against rotenone (RT)-induced toxicity in the <i>Drosophila</i> PD model. The in vivo studies using the RT-induced <i>Drosophila</i> PD model showed significant changes in negative geotaxis behavior and the level of DA and acetylcholinesterase. In addition, oxidative stress markers such as glutathione-<i>S</i>-transferase, total glutathione, thiobarbituric acid reactive species, and protein carbonyl content showed significant amelioration. The positive changes of PPX-PVP-CuO NC treatment in behavior, neurotransmitter level, and antioxidant level suggest its potential role in mitigating the PD phenotype. The formulation can be used for treatment or pharmacological intervention against PD.