Title: Potent New Targets for Autophagy Enhancement to Delay Neuronal Ageing.
PMID: 37443788

Abstract:
Autophagy is a lysosomal-dependent degradation process of eukaryotic cells responsible for breaking down unnecessary and damaged intracellular components. Autophagic activity gradually declines with age due to genetic control, and this change contributes to the accumulation of cellular damage at advanced ages, thereby causing cells to lose their functionality and viability. This could be particularly problematic in post-mitotic cells including neurons, the mass destruction of which leads to various neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we aim to uncover new regulatory points where autophagy could be specifically activated and test these potential drug targets in neurodegenerative disease models of <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>. One possible way to activate autophagy is by enhancing autophagosome-lysosome fusion that creates the autolysosome in which the enzymatic degradation happens. The HOPS (homotypic fusion and protein sorting) and SNARE (Snap receptor) protein complexes regulate the fusion process. The HOPS complex forms a bridge between the lysosome and autophagosome with the assistance of small GTPase proteins. Thus, small GTPases are essential for autolysosome maturation, and among these proteins, Rab2 (Ras-associated binding 2), Rab7, and Arl8 (Arf-like 8) are required to degrade the autophagic cargo. For our experiments, we used <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> as a model organism. Nerve-specific small GTPases were silenced and overexpressed. We examined the effects of these genetic interventions on lifespan, climbing ability, and autophagy. Finally, we also studied the activation of small GTPases in a Parkinson's disease model. Our results revealed that GTP-locked, constitutively active Rab2 (Rab2-CA) and Arl8 (Arl8-CA) expression reduces the levels of the autophagic substrate p62/Ref(2)P in neurons, extends lifespan, and improves the climbing ability of animals during ageing. However, Rab7-CA expression dramatically shortens lifespan and inhibits autophagy. Rab2-CA expression also increases lifespan in a Parkinson's disease model fly strain overexpressing human mutant (A53T) α-synuclein protein. Data provided by this study suggests that Rab2 and Arl8 serve as potential targets for autophagy enhancement in the <i>Drosophila</i> nervous system. In the future, it might be interesting to assess the effect of Rab2 and Arl8 coactivation on autophagy, and it would also be worthwhile to validate these findings in a mammalian model and human cell lines. Molecules that specifically inhibit Rab2 or Arl8 serve as potent drug candidates to modulate the activity of the autophagic process in treating neurodegenerative pathologies. In the future, it would be reasonable to investigate which GAP enzyme can inhibit Rab2 or Arl8 specifically, but not affect Rab7, with similar medical purposes.