Title: Potential Use of the Cholesterol Transfer Inhibitor U18666A as a Potent Research Tool for the Study of Cholesterol Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Disorders.
PMID: 37995080

Abstract:
Cholesterol is an essential component of mammalian cell membranes and a precursor for crucial signaling molecules. The brain contains the highest level of cholesterol in the body, and abnormal cholesterol metabolism links to many neurodegenerative disorders. The results indicate that faulty cholesterol metabolism is a common feature among people living with neurodegenerative conditions. The researchers suggest that restoring cholesterol levels may become a beneficial new strategy in treating certain neurodegenerative conditions. Several neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease, and Parkinson's disease (PD), have been connected to abnormalities in brain cholesterol metabolism. Consequently, using a lipid research tool is vital to study further and understand the effect of lipids in neurodegenerative disorders such as NPC, AD, PD, and Huntington's disease (HD). U18666A, also known as 3-(2-(diethylamino) ethoxy) androst-5-en-17-one, is a pharmaceutical drug that suppresses cholesterol trafficking and is a well-known class-2 amphiphile. U18666A has performed many functions, allowing for essential discoveries in lipid studies and shedding light on the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative disorders. Additionally, U18666A prevented the downregulation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors that are induced by LDL and led to the buildup of cholesterol in lysosomes. Numerous studies show that U18666A impacts the function of cholesterol trafficking to control the metabolism and transport of amyloid precursor proteins (APPs). Treating cortical neurons with U18666A may provide a new in vitro model system for studying the underlying molecular process of NPC, AD, HD, and PD. In this article, we review the mechanism and function of U18666A as a vital tool for studying cholesterol mechanisms in neurological diseases related to abnormal cholesterol metabolism, such as AD, NPC, HD, and PD.