Title: Profiling Analysis of Tryptophan Metabolites in the Urine of Patients with Parkinson's Disease Using LC-MS/MS.
PMID: 37895965

Abstract:
Although Parkinson's disease (PD) is a representative neurodegenerative disorder and shows characteristic motor impediments, the pathophysiological mechanisms and treatment targets for PD have not yet been clearly identified. Since several tryptophan metabolites produced by gut microbiota could pass the blood-brain barrier and, furthermore, might influence the central nervous system, tryptophan metabolites within the indole, kynurenine, and serotonin metabolic pathways might be the most potent targets for PD development. Furthermore, most metabolites are circulated via the blood, play roles in and/or are metabolized via the host organs, and finally are excreted into the urine. Therefore, profiling the overall tryptophan metabolic pathways in urine samples of patients with PD is important to understanding the pathological mechanisms, finding biomarkers, and discovering therapeutic targets for PD. However, the development of profiling analysis based on tryptophan metabolism pathways in human urine samples is still challenging due to the wide physiological ranges, the varied signal response, and the structural diversity of tryptophan metabolites in complicated urine matrices. In this study, an LC-MS/MS method was developed to profile 21 tryptophan metabolites within the indole, kynurenine, and serotonin metabolic pathways in human urine samples using ion-pairing chromatography and multiple reaction monitoring determination. The developed method was successfully applied to urine samples of PD patients (<i>n</i> = 41) and controls (<i>n</i> = 20). Further, we investigated aberrant metabolites to find biomarkers for PD development and therapeutic targets based on the quantitative results. Unfortunately, most tryptophan metabolites in the urine samples did not present significant differences between control and PD patients, except for indole-3-acetic acid. Nonetheless, indole-3-acetic acid was reported for the first time for its aberrant urinary levels in PD patients and tentatively selected as a potential biomarker for PD. This study provides accurate quantitative results for 21 tryptophan metabolites in biological samples and will be helpful in revealing the pathological mechanisms of PD development, discovering biomarkers for PD, and further providing therapeutic targets for various PD symptoms. In the near future, to further investigate the relationship between gut microbial metabolites and PD, we will employ studies on microbial metabolites using plasma and stool samples from control and PD patients.