Title: Proteolysis-Targeting Chimera (PROTAC) Delivery into the Brain across the Blood-Brain Barrier.
PMID: 37489365

Abstract:
Drug development for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease has challenging difficulties due to the pharmacokinetic impermeability based on the blood-brain barrier (BBB) as well as the blurriness of pharmacodynamic targets based on their unclarified pathogenesis and complicated progression mechanisms. Thus, in order to produce innovative central nervous system (CNS) agents for patients suffering from CNS diseases, effective, selective delivery of CNS agents into the brain across the BBB should be developed. Currently, proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) attract rising attention as a new modality to degrade arbitrary intracellular proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The internalizations of peptide-based PROTACs by cell-penetrating peptides and that of small molecule-based PROTACs through passive diffusion lack cell selectivity. Therefore, these approaches may bring off-target side effects due to wrong distribution. Furthermore, efflux transporters such as multiple drug resistance 1 (MDR1) expressed at the BBB might interrupt the entry of small molecule-based PROTACs into the brain. Nonetheless, intelligent delivery using machinery systems to absorb the nutrition into the brain for homeostasis, such as carrier-mediated transport (CMT) or receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT), can be established. PROTACs with <i>N</i>-containing groups that are recognized by the proton-coupled organic cation antiporter might cross the BBB through CMT. PROTAC-antibody conjugates (PACs) might cross the BBB through RMT. Subsequently, such small molecule-based PROTACs released in the brain interstitial fluid would be transported into cells such as neurons through passive diffusion and then demonstrate arbitrary protein degradation. In this review, I introduce the potential and advantages of PROTAC delivery into the brain across the BBB through CMT or RMT using PACs in a non-invasive way.