Title: Qualitative Bioinformatics: Towards a Public Understanding of Neurodegenerative Disease Research through BioArt, Data-Art, Hands-on BioMedia Workshops, Immersive Environments, and Artists in Labs.
PMID: 37581839

Abstract:
Neurodegenerative disease (ND) research is producing new pharmaceutical compounds for chronic diseases utilizing bioinformatics. Algorithmic data mining of high-throughput omics systems is conjoined with the study of the in vitro dynamics of protein folding through visualization techniques, i.e., Bio-AFM. Novel models of disease pathway diagrams are being produced and the processes are in place to enhance the validation of these models. From bench work to BLAST to bedside, globally standardized research is led by collaborative clusters, working on cloud-based platforms, with crowd sourced human cohort collections, pairing pure, curiosity-based neurological research with deep learning data analysis techniques. ND research is leading the way towards clinical applications for preventing, curing, or ameliorating major diseases of neurological dysfunction, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD).Most of this is too complex for the average citizen to comprehend. Can bioart and data-art contribute to the public understanding of genome sequencing and bioinformatics databases in the context of ND research? Informal studies towards demystifying bioinformatics through creative practices have been tested, revealing significant qualitative benefits for public well-being while introducing bioinformatics databases, for instance, previous projects: the VASTAL Bioinformatics and Literary Studies: (De)Mystified Genetic Code Lab, held at the Waag in Amsterdam, NL, 2009 and more recently the Creative Germline Constructs Bank (CGCB) of the transgenic human Genome Alternatives Project (thGAP), held at Hackteria ZET, Zurich, Switzerland, 2021.For the Hub of Art Laboratories (HAL), of the Department of Audio & Visual Arts (AVArts), Ionian University in Corfu, Greece, the animation node is challenged to create audiovisual, immersive, and interactive environments that highlight natural processes and phenomena of the microcosm and macrocosm through nature/data interface experimentation. It is the intention of the node's researchers to expand these notions to be inclusive of the processes of the biotechnological and bioinformatics interrogation of human disease as a part of local clades and global nature. In our productions, we would like to emphasize: cryogenic storage, genome analysis, bioinformatic database management, biomarkers for polygenic abnormalities, genotyping/phenotyping, gene expression patterns over time, AI reading of cloud-based research, experiencial DNA/RNA synthesis, the development of novel DNA, RNA and protein-based therapeutic agents for biomedical applications and CRISPR construct design for model organisms. It is the HAL animation node's goal to design and explore bioart-based, hands-on public workshops that mix bioinformatics and data-art with in-depth knowledge of the scientific community around ND research bodies.To develop these labs, dedicated artistic research is required to be undertaken through laboratory immersion, interactions with scientists, and hands-on experience in the lab. Artists must experience scientific processes through residencies in labs to learn both how to convey the techniques and the social implications of novel methodologies. Artists developing bioart workshops that can introduce non-specialists to a dizzying array of research methodologies need to know what they are talking about. It takes experience and dedication to convey simplified versions of real-time biosensor data, automated histology, clinical databases of medical case studies (anonymized clients), real-time PCR, novel diagnostic biomarker development, etc. As qualitative researchers, artists in labs ensure creative yet informed art and science (SciArt) outcomes able to stimulate public debate through unorthodox education and accurate playfulness. Obviously, the immersive experience of lab research provides an artist's projects with both nuance and knowledge. How can artists in labs also add to the scientific potentials of a laboratory's research goals?