Title: Quantitative Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analyses Reveal a Role of Death-Associated Protein Kinase 1 in Regulating Hippocampal Synapse.
PMID: 37775722

Abstract:
Death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) is a stress-responsive calcium/calmodulin (CaM)-regulated serine/threonine protein kinase that is actively involved in stress-induced cell death. The dysregulation of DAPK1 has been established in various neurological disorders such as epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease (AD), and Parkinson's disease (PD). Recent research indicates a synaptic localization of DAPK1 in neurons, suggesting a potential role of DAPK1 in modulating synaptic structure and function. However, the key molecules and pathways underlying the influence of DAPK1 on synapses remain elusive. We utilized quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to compare the differences in protein expression and phosphorylation in hippocampal tissues of wild-type (WT) and DAPK1-knockout (KO) mice. Bioinformatic analysis of differentially expressed proteins and phosphoproteins revealed a preferential enrichment of proteins involved in regulating synaptic function, cytoskeletal structure, and neurotransmission. Gene set enrichment analysis (GESA) highlighted altered presynaptic functions including synaptic vesicle priming and glutamate secretion in KO mice. Besides, we observed that proteins with potential phosphorylation motifs of ERK and DAPK1 were overrepresented among the differential phosphoproteins and were highly enriched in neuronal function-related pathways. Furthermore, Western blot analysis validated differences in the expression of several proteins closely associated with presynaptic organization, dendrites and calcium transmembrane transport between KO and WT mice, further corroborating the potential involvement of DAPK1 in the regulation of synaptic functions. Overall, our data provide molecular evidence to elucidate the physiological links between DAPK1 and neuronal functions and help clarify the role of DAPK1 in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases.