Title: Repositioning the existing drugs for neuroinflammation: a fusion of computational approach and biological validation to counter the Parkinson's disease progression.
PMID: 37542020

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease is caused by the deficiency of striatal dopamine and the accumulation of aggregated α-synuclein in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Neuroinflammation associated with oxidative stress is a key factor contributing to the death of dopaminergic neurons in SNpc and advancement of Parkinson's disease. Two molecular targets, i.e., nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer (NF-kB) and α-synuclein play a substantial role in neuroinflammation progression. Therefore, the compounds targeting these neuroinflammatory targets hold a great potential to combat Parkinson's disease. Thereby, in this study, molecular docking and Connectivity Map (CMap) based gene expression profiling was utilized to reposition the approved drugs as neuroprotective agents for Parkinson's disease. With in silico screening, two drugs namely theophylline and propylthiouracil were selected for anti-neuroinflammatory activity evaluation in in vivo models of chronic neuroinflammation. The neuroinflammatory effect of the identified compounds was confirmed by quantifying the expression of three important neuroinflammatory mediators, i.e. IL-6, TNF-alpha, and IL-1 beta on brain tissue using ELISA assay. The ELISA experiment demonstrated that both compounds significantly decreased the expression of neuroinflammatory mediators, highlighting the compounds' potential in neuroinflammation management. Furthermore, the drug and disease interaction network of the two identified drugs and diseases (neuroinflammation and Parkinson's disease) suggested that the two drugs might interact with various targets namely adenosine receptors, Poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase-1, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and thyroid peroxidase through multiple pathways associated with neuroinflammation and Parkinson's disease. Computational studies suggest that a particular drug may be effective in managing Parkinson's disease associated with neuroinflammation. However, further research is needed to confirm this in biological experiments.