Title: Rosmarinic acid against cognitive impairment via RACK1/HIF-1α regulated microglial polarization in sepsis-surviving mice.
PMID: 38103880

Abstract:
Microglial polarization modulation has been considered the potential therapeutic strategy for relieving cognitive impairment in sepsis survivors. Rosmarinic acid (RA), a water-soluble polyphenolic natural compound, processes a strong protective effect on various types of neurological disorders including Parkinson's disease, depression, and anxiety. However, its role and potential molecular mechanisms in sepsis-associated cognitive impairment remain unclear. To investigate the preventive and therapeutic effect of RA on sepsis-associated cognitive impairment and elucidate the potential mechanism of RA on regulating microglial polarization, we established a CLP-induced cognitive impairment model in mice and a lipopolysaccharide-induced microglia polarization cell model in BV-2. RACK1 siRNA was designed to identify the potential molecular mechanism of RACK1 on microglial polarization. The preventive and therapeutic effect of RA on cognitive impairment followed by PET-CT and behavioral tests including open-field test and tail suspension test. RACK1/HIF-1α pathway and microglial morphology in the hippocampus or BV-2 cells were measured. The results showed that RA significantly ameliorated the CLP-induced depressive and anxiety-like behaviors and promoted whole-brain glucose uptake in mice. Moreover, RA markedly improved CLP-induced hippocampal neuron loss and microglial activation by inhibiting microglial M1 polarization. Furthermore, experiments showed RACK1 was involved in the regulation of LPS-induced microglial M1 polarization via HIF-1α, and RA suppressed lipopolysaccharide or sepsis-associated microglial M1 polarization via RACK1/HIF-1α pathway (rescued the decrease of RACK1 and increase of HIF-1α). Taken together, RA could be a potential preventive and therapeutic medication in improving cognitive impairment through RACK1/HIF-1α pathway-regulated microglial polarization.