Title: Sensitized Emission Imaging Allows Nanoscale Surface Polarity Mapping of α-Synuclein Amyloid Fibrils.
PMID: 38099928

Abstract:
When misfolded, α-Synuclein (α-Syn), a natively disordered protein, aggregates to form amyloid fibrils responsible for the neurodegeneration observed in Parkinson's disease. Structural studies revealed distinct molecular packing of α-Syn in different fibril polymorphs and variations of interprotofilament connections in the fibrillar architecture. Fibril polymorphs have been hypothesized to exhibit diverse surface polarities depending on the folding state of the protein during aggregation; however, the spatial variation of surface polarity in amyloid fibrils remains unexplored. To map the local polarity (or hydrophobicity) along α-Syn fibrils, we visualized the spectral characteristics of two dyes with distinct polarities-hydrophilic Thioflavin T (ThT) and hydrophobic Nile red (NR)─when both are bound to α-Syn fibrils. Dual-channel fluorescence imaging reveals uneven partitioning of ThT and NR along individual fibrils, implying that relatively more polar/hydrophobic patches are spread over a few hundred nanometers. Remarkably, spectrally resolved sensitized emission imaging of α-Syn fibrils provides unambiguous evidence of energy transfer from ThT to NR, implying that dyes of dissimilar polarity are in close proximity. Furthermore, spatially resolved fluorescence spectroscopy of the solvatochromic probe NR allowed us to quantitatively map the range and variation of the polarity parameter E<sub>T</sub>30 along individual fibrils. Our results suggest the existence of interlaced polar and nonpolar nanoscale domains throughout the fibrils; however, the relative populations of these patches vary considerably over larger length scales likely due to heterogeneous packing of α-Syn during fibrilization and dissimilar exposed polarities of polymorphic segments. The employed method may provide a foundation for imaging modalities of other similar structurally unresolved systems with diverse hydrophobic-hydrophilic topology.