Title: SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin alleviates cardiac remodeling and contractile anomalies in a FUNDC1-dependent manner in experimental Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 37679644

Abstract:
Recent evidence shows a close link between Parkinson's disease (PD) and cardiac dysfunction with limited treatment options. Mitophagy plays a crucial role in the control of mitochondrial quantity, metabolic reprogramming and cell differentiation. Mutation of the mitophagy protein Parkin is directly associated with the onset of PD. Parkin-independent receptor-mediated mitophagy is also documented such as BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19 kDa protein-interacting protein 3 (BNIP3) and FUN14 domain containing 1 (FUNDC1) for receptor-mediated mitophagy. In this study we investigated cardiac function and mitophagy including FUNDC1 in PD patients and mouse models, and evaluated the therapeutic potential of a SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin. MPTP-induced PD model was established. PD patients and MPTP mice not only displayed pronounced motor defects, but also low plasma FUNDC1 levels, as well as cardiac ultrastructural and geometric anomalies (cardiac atrophy, interstitial fibrosis), functional anomalies (reduced E/A ratio, fractional shortening, ejection fraction, cardiomyocyte contraction) and mitochondrial injury (ultrastructural damage, UCP2, PGC1α, elevated mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake proteins MCU and VDAC1, and mitochondrial apoptotic protein calpain), dampened autophagy, FUNDC1 mitophagy and apoptosis. By Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we found overtly altered glucose transmembrane transport in the midbrains of MPTP-treated mice. Intriguingly, administration of SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin (10 mg/kg, i.p., twice per week for 2 weeks) in MPTP-treated mice significantly ameliorated myocardial anomalies (with exception of VDAC1), but did not reconcile the motor defects or plasma FUNDC1. FUNDC1 global knockout (FUNDC1<sup>-/-</sup> mice) did not elicit any phenotype on cardiac geometry or function in the absence or presence of MPTP insult, but it nullified empagliflozin-caused cardioprotection against MPTP-induced cardiac anomalies including remodeling (atrophy and fibrosis), contractile dysfunction, Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis, mitochondrial (including MCU, mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> overload, calpain, PARP1) and apoptotic anomalies. In neonatal and adult cardiomyocytes, treatment with PD neurotoxin preformed fibrils of α-synuclein (PFF) caused cytochrome c release and cardiomyocyte mechanical defects. These effects were mitigated by empagliflozin (10 μM) or MCU inhibitor Ru360 (10 μM). MCU activator kaempferol (10 μM) or calpain activator dibucaine (500 μM) nullified the empagliflozin-induced beneficial effects. These results suggest that empagliflozin protects against PD-induced cardiac anomalies, likely through FUNDC1-mediated regulation of mitochondrial integrity.