Title: Single-Cell Analyses Reveal Necroptosis's Potential Role in Neuron Degeneration and Show Enhanced Neuron-Immune Cell Interaction in Parkinson's Disease Progression.
PMID: 38149092

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neuron degenerative disease among the old, characterized by uncontrollable movements and an impaired posture. Although widely investigated on its pathology and treatment, the disease remains incompletely understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has been applied to the area of PD, providing valuable data for related research. However, few works have taken deeper insights into the causes of neuron death and cell-cell interaction between the cell types in the brain. Our bioinformatics analyses revealed necroptosis-related genes (NRGs) enrichment in neuron degeneration and selecting the cells by NRGs levels showed two subtypes within the main degenerative cell types in the midbrain. NRG-low subtype was largely replaced by NRG-high subtype in the patients, indicating the striking change of cell state related to necroptosis in PD progression. Moreover, we carried out cell-cell interaction analyses between cell types and found that microglia (MG)'s interaction strength with glutamatergic neuron (GLU), GABAergic neuron (GABA), and dopaminergic neuron (DA) was significantly upregulated in PD. Also, MG show much stronger interaction with NRG-high subtypes and a stronger cell killing function in PD samples. Additionally, we identified CLDN11 as a novel interaction pattern specific to necroptosis neurons and MG. We also found LEF1 and TCF4 as key transcriptional regulators in neuron degeneration. These findings suggest that MG were significantly overactivated in PD patients to clear abnormal neurons, especially the NRG-high cells, explaining the neuron inflammation in PD. Our analyses provide insights into the causes of neuron death and inflammation in PD from single-cell resolution, which could be seriously considered in clinical trials.