Title: SIRT3-Mediated Deacetylation of SDHA Rescues Mitochondrial Bioenergetics Contributing to Neuroprotection in Rotenone-Induced PD Models.
PMID: 38087172

Abstract:
Mitochondrial dysfunction is critically involved in the degeneration of dopamine (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra, a common pathological feature of Parkinson's disease (PD). Previous studies have demonstrated that the NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent acetylase Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) participates in maintaining mitochondrial function and is downregulated in aging-related neurodegenerative disorders. The exact mechanism of action of SIRT3 on mitochondrial bioenergetics in PD pathogenesis, however, has not been fully described. In this study, we investigated the regulatory role of SIRT3-mediated deacetylation of mitochondrial complex II (succinate dehydrogenase) subunit A (SDHA) and its effect on neuronal cell survival in rotenone (ROT)-induced rat and differentiated MN9D cell models. The results revealed that SIRT3 activity was suppressed in both in vivo and in vitro PD models. Accompanying this downregulation of SIRT3 was the hyperacetylation of SDHA, impaired activity of mitochondrial complex II, and decreased ATP production. It was found that the inhibition of SIRT3 activity was attributed to a reduction in the NAD<sup>+</sup>/NADH ratio caused by ROT-induced inhibition of mitochondrial complex I. Activation of SIRT3 by icariin and honokiol inhibited SDHA hyperacetylation and increased complex II activity, leading to increased ATP production and protection against ROT-induced neuronal damage. Furthermore, overexpression of SDHA also exerted potent protective benefits in cells treated with ROT. In addition, treatment of MN9D cells with the NAD<sup>+</sup> precursor nicotinamide mononucleotide increased SIRT3 activity and complex II activity and promoted the survival of cells exposed to ROT. These findings unravel a regulatory SIRT3-SDHA axis, which may be closely related to PD pathology. Bioenergetic rescue through SIRT3 activation-dependent improvement of mitochondrial complex II activity may provide an effective strategy for protection from neurodegeneration.