Title: Structural and molecular cholinergic imaging markers of cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 37403733

Abstract:
Cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease is related to cholinergic system degeneration, which can be assessed in vivo using structural MRI markers of basal forebrain volume and PET measures of cortical cholinergic activity. In the present study we aimed to examine the interrelation between basal forebrain degeneration and PET-measured depletion of cortical acetylcholinesterase activity as well as their relative contribution to cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease. This cross-sectional study included 143 Parkinson's disease participants without dementia and 52 healthy control participants who underwent structural MRI, PET scanning with 11C-methyl-4-piperidinyl propionate (PMP) as a measure of cortical acetylcholinesterase activity, and a detailed cognitive assessment. Based on the fifth percentile of the overall cortical PMP PET signal from the control group, people with Parkinson's disease were subdivided into a normo-cholinergic (n = 94) and a hypo-cholinergic group (n = 49). Volumes of functionally defined posterior and anterior basal forebrain subregions were extracted using an established automated MRI volumetry approach based on a stereotactic atlas of cholinergic basal forebrain nuclei. We used Bayesian t-tests to compare basal forebrain volumes between controls, and normo- and hypo-cholinergic Parkinson's participants after covarying out age, sex and years of education. Associations between the two cholinergic imaging measures were assessed across all people with Parkinson's disease using Bayesian correlations and their respective relations with performance in different cognitive domains were assessed with Bayesian ANCOVAs. As a specificity analysis, hippocampal volume was added to the analysis. We found evidence for a reduction of posterior basal forebrain volume in the hypo-cholinergic compared to both normo-cholinergic Parkinson's disease [Bayes factor against the null model (BF10) = 8.2] and control participants (BF10 = 6.0), while for the anterior basal forebrain the evidence was inconclusive (BF10 < 3). In continuous association analyses, posterior basal forebrain volume was significantly associated with cortical PMP PET signal in a temporo-posterior distribution. The combined models for the prediction of cognitive scores showed that both cholinergic markers (posterior basal forebrain volume and cortical PMP PET signal) were independently related to multi-domain cognitive deficits, and were more important predictors for all cognitive scores, including memory scores, than hippocampal volume. We conclude that degeneration of the posterior basal forebrain in Parkinson's disease is accompanied by functional cortical changes in acetylcholinesterase activity and that both PET and MRI cholinergic imaging markers are independently associated with multi-domain cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease without dementia. Comparatively, hippocampal atrophy only seems to have minimal involvement in the development of early cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.