Title: Tenuigenin promotes non-rapid eye movement sleep via the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor and exerts somnogenic effect in a MPTP mouse model of Parkinson's disease.
PMID: 37531785

Abstract:
Sleep disturbances are commonly non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's diseases (PD). However, standard dopamine replacement therapies for the treatment of motor symptoms often prove inadequate in combating sleep disturbances. Previous studies conducted by our research group have reported the neuroprotective effects of tenuigenin, a natural extract from Polygala tenuifolia root, which has been traditionally employed in treating insomnia. The objective of this study was to investigate the potential of tenuigenin in modulating sleep-wake behaviors and elucidate the underlying mechanisms. We employed EEG/EMG recordings to evaluate the impact of tenuigenin on sleep-wake profiles. Furthermore, we utilized c-Fos immunostaining, whole-cell patch clamping and local field potentials (LFP) recording to explore the mechanisms involved in sleep-promoting effects of tenuigenin. Additionally, we examined the effects of tenuigenin on sleep-promoting in MPTP PD mice. Here, we found tenuigenin demonstrated a significant increase in NREM sleep and a reduction in sleep latency in mice, without altering the EEG power density. Moreover, tenuigenin increased c-Fos expression in the ventrolateral preoptic area (VLPO) and stimulated sleep-promoting neurons in VLPO. The sleep-promoting effects of tenuigenin were abolished when mice were pretreated with flumazenil, an antagonist at the benzodiazepine site of the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor. Furthermore, tenuigenin was found to ameliorate sleep disturbances in MPTP-induced mice. The results suggesting that tenuigenin facilitated a type of NREM sleep comparable to physiological NREM sleep through interaction with the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor. Additionally, tenuigenin demonstrated improvements in sleep disturbances in MPTP-induced PD mice, suggesting its potential as a sleep-promoting substance, particularly for PD patients experiencing sleep disturbances.