Title: The discovery of subunit-selective GluN1/GluN2B NMDAR antagonist via pharmacophere-based virtual screening.
PMID: 38282535

Abstract:
The incidence and mortality rates of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, are gradually increasing worldwide. Numerous studies have demonstrated that N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor (NMDAR)-mediated excitotoxicity contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. Ifenprodil, a subtype-selective NMDAR antagonist, showed strong therapeutic potential. However, it suffers from low oral bioavailability and off-target side effects. In this study, natural compounds were identified for selective inhibition of GluN1/GluN2B NMDAR of human. We obtained a set of natural compounds (<i>n</i> = 81,366) from COCONUT, TIPdb, PAMDB, CMNPD, YMDB, and NPAtlas databases, and then virtually screened by an ifenprodil-structure-based pharmacophore model and molecular docking. The top 100 compounds were selected for binding affinity prediction via batch drug-target affinity (BatchDTA). Then, the top 50 compounds were analyzed by absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicity (ADMET). Molecular dynamics involving molecular mechanics/position-Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) calculation were performed to further screening. The top 15 compounds with strong binding affinity and ifenprodil, a proven GluN2B-selective NMDAR antagonist, were subjected to molecular dynamic simulations (100 ns), root-mean-square deviation (RMSD), root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF), radius of gyration (Rg), H-bonds, solvent accessible surface area (SASA), principal component analysis (PCA), and binding free energy calculations. Based on these analyses, one possible lead compound carrying positive charges (CNP0099440) was identified, with great binding affinity and less off-target activity by contrast to ifenprodil. CNP0099440 has great potential to be a GluN1/GluN2B NMDAR antagonist candidate and can be further detected via <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> experiments.