Title: TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis of neuroprotective effects of Forsythoside A on the MPTP-induced Parkinson's disease mouse model.
PMID: 38056584

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disorder characteristized by the presence of dyskinesia and the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons. Although certain drugs can mitigate the symptoms of PD, they are unable to delay the disease progression, and their prolonged use may result in complications. Therefore, there exists an urgent necessity to identify potential agents that can effectively delay PD progression with fewer side effects. Recent research has unveiled that several traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) exhibit neuroprotective properties in various models pertinent to PD. Forsythoside A (FSA), the primary bioactive compound derived from TCM Lianqiao, has undergone extensive research in animal models of Alzheimer's disease and cerebral ischemia. However, the investigation into the impact of FSA on PD is limited in existing research. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the neuroprotective effects of FSA on MPTP-induced PD mouse model. FSA demonstrated significant improvements in the behavioral and neuropathological changes triggered by MPTP in mice. Furthermore, it exerted a suppressive effect on the activations of astrocyte and microglia. Meanwhile, Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics of striatal tissue and bioinformatics analysis were performed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of FSA on PD mouse model. Proteomics demonstrated a total of 68 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified between HFSA and MPTP groups including 26 upregulated and 42 downregulated. Systematic bioinformatics analysis of the 68 DEPs illustrated that they were predominantly related to estrogen signaling pathway and calcium signaling pathway. The related DEPs (PLCβ4, Grm2, HPAC and Cox4i1) expression levels were verified by Western blot. FSA effectively restored the altered expression of the four DEPs induced by MPTP. Summarily, FSA exerted remarkable neuroprotective effects in MPTP-induced mice. Further, our research may provide proteomics insights that contribute to the further exploration of FSA as a potential treatment for PD.