Title: Unilateral rNurr1-V5 transgene expression in nigral dopaminergic neurons mitigates bilateral neuropathology and behavioral deficits in parkinsonian rats with α-synucleinopathy.
PMID: 38227536

Abstract:
JOURNAL/nrgr/04.03/01300535-202409000-00039/figure1/v/2024-01-16T170235Z/r/image-tiff Parkinsonism by unilateral, intranigral β-sitosterol β-D-glucoside administration in rats is distinguished in that the α-synuclein insult begins unilaterally but spreads bilaterally and increases in severity over time, thus replicating several clinical features of Parkinson's disease, a typical α-synucleinopathy. As Nurr1 represses α-synuclein, we evaluated whether unilateral transfected of rNurr1-V5 transgene via neurotensin-polyplex to the substantia nigra on day 30 after unilateral β-sitosterol β-D-glucoside lesion could affect bilateral neuropathology and sensorimotor deficits on day 30 post-transfection. This study found that rNurr1-V5 expression but not that of the green fluorescent protein (the negative control) reduced β-sitosterol β-D-glucoside-induced neuropathology. Accordingly, a bilateral increase in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells and arborization occurred in the substantia nigra and increased tyrosine hydroxylase-positive ramifications in the striatum. In addition, tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells displayed less senescence marker β-galactosidase and more neuron-cytoskeleton marker βIII-tubulin and brain-derived neurotrophic factor. A significant decrease in activated microglia (positive to ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1) and neurotoxic astrocytes (positive to glial fibrillary acidic protein and complement component 3) and increased neurotrophic astrocytes (positive to glial fibrillary acidic protein and S100 calcium-binding protein A10) also occurred in the substantia nigra. These effects followed the bilateral reduction in α-synuclein aggregates in the nigrostriatal system, improving sensorimotor behavior. Our results show that unilateral rNurr1-V5 transgene expression in nigral dopaminergic neurons mitigates bilateral neurodegeneration (senescence and loss of neuron-cytoskeleton and tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells), neuroinflammation (activated microglia, neurotoxic astrocytes), α-synuclein aggregation, and sensorimotor deficits. Increased neurotrophic astrocytes and brain-derived neurotrophic factor can mediate the rNurr1-V5 effect, supporting its potential clinical use in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.