Title: Whole proteome copy number dataset in primary mouse cortical neurons.
PMID: 37456110

Abstract:
The functional diversity of neurons is specified through their proteome resulting in elaborate and tightly regulated protein interaction networks and signalling that regulates neuronal processes. Dysregulation of these dynamic networks in development or in adulthood lead to neurodevelopmental or neurological disorders respectively. Over the past few decades, mass spectrometry has become a powerful tool for quantifying and resolving any proteome, including complex tissues such as the brain proteome, with technological advances leading to higher levels of resolution and throughput than traditional biochemical techniques. In this article, we provide a proteomic reference dataset that has been generated to identify proteins and quantify their level of expression in primary mouse cortical neurons. It represents a summary analysis of previously published data in (Antico et al., 2021). Mouse cortical neurons were isolated from E16.5 C57Bl/6J mice and cultured for 21 <i>days in vitro</i> (DIV). We employed the mitochondrial uncouplers AntimycinA/Oligomycin (AO) to induce mitochondrial depolarisation that is a well-established paradigm to assess mitophagic signalling. Total lysates from mouse primary cortical neurons were subjected to label-free quantitative proteomic analysis using both data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA) modes. DDA proteomic analysis identified a total dataset of 9367 proteins in mouse cortical neurons and absolute abundance of proteins was calculated as copy numbers per cell. DDA dataset was also processed to generate a reference spectral library to fit in and quantify MS spectra generated in DIA mode. Quantitative DIA analysis identified more than 6000 protein groups and statistical comparison of the two analysed groups (untreated and AO-treated) revealed that the neuronal proteome was largely unchanged post mitochondrial depolarisation for 5 hours. To our knowledge, these files represent the most comprehensive DDA and DIA reference datasets of fully functional maturated mouse primary cortical neurons and serve as a valuable resource for further investigating the role of specific proteins involved in neurobiology and neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD).