Title: α-Synuclein induces deficiency in clathrin-mediated endocytosis through inhibiting synaptojanin1 expression.
PMID: 37788328

Abstract:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is an age-related chronic neurological disorder, mainly characterized by the pathological feature of α-synuclein (α-syn) aggregation, with the exact disease pathogenesis unclear. During the onset and progression of PD, synaptic dysfunction, including dysregulation of axonal transport, impaired exocytosis, and endocytosis are identified as crucial events of PD pathogenesis. It has been reported that over-expression of α-syn impairs clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) in the synapses. However, the underlying mechanisms still needs to be explored. In this study, we investigated the molecular events underlying the synaptic dysfunction caused by over-expression of wild-type human α-syn and its mutant form, involving series of proteins participating in CME. We found that excessive human α-syn causes impaired fission and uncoating of clathrin-coated vesicles during synaptic vesicle recycling, leading to reduced clustering of synaptic vesicles near the active zone and increased size of plasma membrane and number of endocytic intermediates. Furthermore, over-expressed human α-syn induced changes of CME-associated proteins, among which synaptojanin1 (SYNJ1) showed significant reduction in various brain regions. Over-expression of SYNJ1 in primary hippocampal neurons from α-syn transgenic mice recovered the synaptic vesicle density, clustering and endocytosis. Using fluorescence-conjugated transferrin, we demonstrated that SYNJ1 re-boosted the CME activity by restoring the phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate homeostasis. Our data suggested that over-expression of α-syn disrupts synaptic function through interfering with vesicle recycling, which could be alleviated by re-availing of SYNJ1. Our study unrevealed a molecular mechanism of the synaptic dysfunction in PD pathogenesis and provided a potential therapeutic target for treating PD.