Title: α-Synuclein Strains and Their Relevance to Parkinson's Disease, Multiple System Atrophy, and Dementia with Lewy Bodies.
PMID: 37569510

Abstract:
Like many neurodegenerative diseases, Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the formation of proteinaceous aggregates in brain cells. In PD, those proteinaceous aggregates are formed by the α-synuclein (αSyn) and are considered the trademark of this neurodegenerative disease. In addition to PD, αSyn pathological aggregation is also detected in atypical Parkinsonism, including Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), Multiple System Atrophy (MSA), as well as neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, some cases of traumatic brain injuries, and variants of Alzheimer's disease. Collectively, these (and other) disorders are referred to as synucleinopathies, highlighting the relation between disease type and protein misfolding/aggregation. Despite these pathological relationships, however, synucleinopathies cover a wide range of pathologies, present with a multiplicity of symptoms, and arise from dysfunctions in different neuroanatomical regions and cell populations. Strikingly, αSyn deposition occurs in different types of cells, with oligodendrocytes being mainly affected in MSA, while aggregates are found in neurons in PD. If multiple factors contribute to the development of a pathology, especially in the cases of slow-developing neurodegenerative disorders, the common presence of αSyn aggregation, as both a marker and potential driver of disease, is puzzling. In this review, we will focus on comparing PD, DLB, and MSA, from symptomatology to molecular description, highlighting the role and contribution of αSyn aggregates in each disorder. We will particularly present recent evidence for the involvement of conformational strains of αSyn aggregates and discuss the reciprocal relationship between αSyn strains and the cellular milieu. Moreover, we will highlight the need for effective methodologies for the strainotyping of aggregates to ameliorate diagnosing capabilities and therapeutic treatments.